Child Development, July/August 2007, Volume 78, Number 4, Pages 1052 – 1067

Mothers’ Use of Cognitive State Verbs in Picture-Book Reading and the

Development of Children’s Understanding of Mind: A Longitudinal Study

Juan E. Adria´n, Rosa Ana Clemente, and Lido´ n Villanueva

Universitat Jaume I

Mothers read stories to their children (N 5 41) aged between 3.3 years and 5.11 years old, and children then
completed two false-belief tasks. One year later, mothers read a story to 37 of those children who were also given
four tasks to assess their advanced understanding of mental states. Mothers’ early use of cognitive verbs in picture-
book reading correlated with their children’s later understanding of mental states. Some pragmatic aspects of
maternal input correlated with children’s later outcomes. Two different factors in mothers’ cognitive discourse
were identified, suggesting a zone of proximal development in children’s understanding of mental states.

Mother-child communicative interactions have been
used to study the influence of social factors on chil-
dren’s developing understanding of mind. Since the
conversational studies of Dunn and colleagues
(Dunn, Brown, Slomkowski, Tesla, & Youngblade,
1991; Dunn, Brown & Beardsall, 1991) up to the
present day, research has shown that mothers’ dis-
course and language about mental states is related to
children’s abilities to understand mental states (e.g.,
Bartsch & Wellman, 1995; Ruffman, Slade, & Crowe,
2002).

The correlations may be interpreted in opposite
directions. That is, frequent and diverse references to
mental terms by mothers might encourage the chil-
dren’s understanding of mental states. But it is also
possible that children with a greater understanding of
mental states allow mothers to talk about inner states
more freely. In a longitudinal study, Ruffman et al.
(2002) argued for the predictive role of mothers’
mental conversation on children’s theory of mind.
Three times during one year (Times 1, 2, and 3), they
collected data on children’s theory of mind and
mothers’ mental and nonmental utterances. They
found that mothers’ mental state utterances Times 1
and 2 consistently correlated with the children’s
understanding of theory of mind during Times 2
and 3. This association held beyond contributions of
other potential mediators, including children’s prior
language ability and theory of mind performance at

This research was funded by financial support from the Spanish
Ministry of Science and Technology (Project BSO2003-07173), and
the Generalitat Valenciana (GV05/200). The authors wish to thank
the mothers and children who participated in the study.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed
to Juan E. Adria´n, Department of Developmental Psychology,
Universitat Jaume I, Castello´n, Avda. Sos Baynat s/n, 12071,
Spain. Electronic mail may be sent to adrian@psi.uji.es.

Times 1 and 2. The reciprocal relation did not hold;
that is, the children’s earlier understanding of theory
of mind did not predict mothers’ later use of utter-
ances about mental states.

The children studied by Ruffman et al. (2002) were
3 to 4 years old, the age typically studied in theory of
mind research. Of interest is whether similar effects
extend to older children. Because children’s social
interactions expand to include people other than their
parents as they enter their school years, parental
influences could tend to diminish. Nevertheless,
parent-child relationships might still be important in
later developments of children’s understanding of
mental states, and indeed this could be useful to
develop an ‘‘advanced theory of mind.’’ In compari-
son to earlier development, and especially false belief,
very little is known about this area. Carpendale and
Lewis (2004) stated that, in order to grasp the com-
plexity of a culture’s psychology (Lillard, 1998),
researchers who are exploring how children acquire
a mature understanding of mind must go beyond the
age of 4. And in this search, it could be necessary to
explore transactions between the child and others in
which the child constructs social understanding. To
our knowledge, only one study has used the
advanced theory of mind to examine the effects of
mothers’ language concerning mental states in chil-
dren. In a study involving children between the ages
of 4½ and 6, de Rosnay, Pons, Harris, and Morrell
(2004)
their
children’s psychological attributes correctly pre-
dicted the children’s performance in two belief-based
emotion attribution tasks. These effects were verified
after controlling for the children’s understanding of

found that mothers’ descriptions of

# 2007 by the Society for Research in Child Development, Inc.
All rights reserved. 0009-3920/2007/7804-0002

false beliefs, age, and language ability. Such findings
may suggest that mothers’ psychological language
still plays a critical role in children’s understanding of
mental states in this period, but further evidence is
required to confirm such a proposition.

From the two studies mentioned earlier, it remains
unclear what aspect of maternal input is critical for
children to advance. Researchers and theorists have
highlighted several possibilities. First, on a semantic
level, perhaps the frequency of mother’s general talk
about mental states helps children to learn about the
mind, because each new utterance, including mental
terms, draws the child’s attention to mental processes
(e.g., Ruffman et al., 2002; de Rosnay et al., 2004). On
a syntactic level, mothers’ mental talk may offer
children frequent chances to learn about the tensed
complements associated with remarkably mental
verbs such as ‘‘think’’ and ‘‘know’’ (e.g., ‘‘I think
that’’). So, tensed complements would play a key role
in appreciating the ways that people can convey
propositions that may or may not be true (e.g., de
Villiers & de Villiers, 2000). Finally, on a pragmatic
level, the critical aspect might be the fact that mothers’
discourse contains different perspectives, and this
enables children to realize that people differ in their
points of view and in the information that they have
available to them (Harris, 1996, 1999, 2005). An
important obstacle to clarifying these different possi-
bilities, however, is the high correlation between all
three indexes (semantic, syntactic, and pragmatic)
that are inherent in mental talk (Harris, 2005). Indeed,
many mental verbs are complement-taking verbs
(e.g., think, know, believe, hope), and they simulta-
neously convey and articulate people’s different
points of view on a given topic.

The present study was designed to examine the
relations between mothers’ mental talk and older
children’s understanding of mental states and to
analyze several aspects of maternal input thought to
be critical in helping children to develop. To explore
these relations, first we conducted a longitudinal
study in which mothers and children were assessed
at two time points over a year. Children were aged
3 – 7 years and assessment consisted in evaluating
their understanding of false belief, as well as sub-
sequent developments relevant to children’s social
understanding (e.g., understanding of deception,
comprehension of nonliteral communicative inten-
tions, such as irony and white lies, and grasping the
degree of certainty). Mothers’ mental talk was exam-
ined through a number of picture-book reading tasks
they carried out with their children. Theory of mind
research has shown joint reading and similar tasks to
be a useful resource in exploring mental state dis-

Mothers’ Use of Cognitive State Verbs

1053

false belief,

course and their relations with children’s advance-
ment (e.g., Ratner & Olver, 1998; Sabbagh & Callanan,
1998; Symons, Peterson, Slaughter, Roche, & Doyle,
2005; Adria´n, Clemente, Villanueva, & Rieffe, 2005).
In our study, we focused on mothers’ use of cognitive
verbs. There are a number of reasons to believe that
mothers’ cognitive discourse affects children’s devel-
opment of their understanding of mind. Preschoolers’
understanding of some simple mental verbs related to
the degree of certainty about knowledge, such as think
and know, have been linked to the earlier development
of concepts related to theory of mind, such as the
understanding of
representational
change, the appearance-reality distinction, and the
development of subjectivity (Moore, Pure, & Furrow,
1990; Olson & Astington, 1990, p.715). Parents’ refer-
ences to mental states might therefore have an impor-
tant effect on children’s development (Olson, 1988;
Astington, 1996). Several studies have suggested that
mothers’ use of cognitive terms might be more closely
related to children’s understanding of false beliefs
than other references to mental states (Le Sourn-
Bissaoui, & Deleau, 2001; Adria´n et al., 2005). In fact,
children’s understanding of mental state verbs con-
tinues throughout childhood but along different
paths. For example, there may be variations in the
levels of processing (Frank & Hall, 1991; Booth & Hall,
1994), in their cognitive organization (e.g., D’Andrade,
1987; Schwanenflugel, Fabricius, Noyes, Bigler, &
Alexander, 1994), or in the development of how
extensions are organized for particular verbs, such
as ‘‘knowing.’’ All these studies suggest that a con-
structivist
theory of mind has been developing
over recent years (Schwanenflugel, Henderson, &
Fabricius, 1998). It is therefore reasonable to think
that parents’ references to mental states could still
help their children to learn, as suggested by de Rosnay
et al. (2004).

In order to examine what aspect of maternal input
might be critical to a child’s understanding of mental
states, we also focused on several pragmatic features
of mothers’ use of cognitive verbs. First, we asked
about the referents of the cognitive verbs used by
mothers. There are a number of reasons to think that
mothers’ use of referents in their reading-based
discourse can be useful in evaluating effects on chil-
dren’s understanding of mental states. In line with
Harris’s claims (2005, 1999, 1996) about the role of
conversational discourse as a means of exposing
children to different points of view, examining the
referents of verbs can be a useful way to identify such
different points of views and perspectives. On the
other hand, Bruner (1983) analyzed joint book-reading
as an activity that involves multiple perspectives,

1054 Adria´n, Clemente, and Villanueva

which must be integrated within a process of inter-
subjectivity, in order to achieve a shared point of view,
knowledge, and so forth. Mothers do refer to the
characters’ mental states during reading, but they also
refer to their own mental states, for instance, when
interpreting and extending the characters’ actions and
behaviors. This could be especially true in picture-
based stories, since the complex mental states of
characters may not be so easy to depict (Dyer, Shatz,
& Wellman, 2000). Additionally, mothers routinely
ask about the children’s mental states, for instance,
when they try to check children’s comprehension.
Therefore, this sort of information, which could be
interpreted within the dynamics of the triadic struc-
ture of referential communication (Chapman, 1999),
might help us to identify specific processes that
account for the facilitating effect mothers’ language
has on the development of children’s understanding
of mind. While the present work was under revision,
this issue was also addressed in a recent study by
Taumoepeau and Ruffman (2006), who explored the
relation between mothers’ mental state language and
15- to 24-month-old children’s desire language and
understanding of emotion. Findings showed that the
most consistent correlate of children’s later mental
state language and understanding of emotion was the
mothers’ tendency to refer to the child’s desires rather
than those of others during a picture-describing task.
We also investigated other functional aspects of
mothers’ use of cognitive verbs during reading.
Research has shown how some facilitative aspects of
adult speech (e.g., joint attention, adult modeling of
new verb forms, frequent questions and contingent
feedback for children’s speech, and shared conversa-
tional topics) are associated with children’s linguistic
competence (e.g., Snow & Ferguson, 1977; Whitehurst
& DeBaryshe, 1989). Moreover, these modalities are
likely to occur more often during book-reading than
in other activity settings (Hoff-Ginsberg, 1991). We
could argue that the use of mothers’ mental talk is
necessarily involved in some of these discursive
aspects and also facilitates children’s understanding
of mental states. We therefore examined the utter-
ances, which included mothers’ use of cognitive
verbs, in search of some pragmatic features, such as
asking questions, explanations, reflections on the
reading, and so forth.

From previous assumptions, we predicted that (a)
mothers’ early use of cognitive verbs in picture-book
reading tasks would relate positively to children’s
understanding of mental states a year later; and (b)
the reverse pattern would not hold (that is, between
children’s early understanding of mental states and
mothers’ use of cognitive verbs one year later). We

also controlled for possible mediator variables, such
as children’s verbal ability and mothers’ education.

Method

Participants

At Time 1, there were 41 mother-and-child dyads.
The children, 24 boys and 17 girls, were between the
ages of 3.3 and 5.11 (M 5 4;7, SD 5 8.25 months). At
Time 2, there were 37 mother-and-child dyads. The
children, 22 boys and 15 girls, were between the ages
of 4.3 and 7.0 (M 5 5.9, SD 5 8.70 months). Mothers
participated in the study after responding to adver-
tisements placed in public schools. All participants
came from working and middle-class White families
in an urban area of Spain.

Materials and Procedure

Table 1 provides a summary of the tasks adminis-
tered at each time point. The tasks used to evaluate
children’s understanding of mental states were dif-
ferent at the two time points to ensure they were
appropriate for the age group being tested and to
evaluate children’s later acquisitions beyond false
beliefs, as was commented on above. The order of
the tasks was counterbalanced among participants at
both time points.

False-belief tasks. Two false-belief tasks were ad-
ministered at Time 1. First, the ‘‘unexpected transfer
task’’ developed by Wimmer and Perner (1983) was
used. In this task, the children are shown a character
(Sally) who puts a ball in a box and then leaves. A
second character (Ann), who was watching what was
happening, takes the ball from the box, hides it

Table 1
Tasks Employed at Each Time Point

Time 1

Time 2

Mental state

understanding

False-belief transfer task White lie
False-belief content task

Irony
Deception
Certainty
1 Puzzle

picture-book
task

Picture-book reading

4 Picture-book tasks

Verbal ability
Maternal education

WPPSI (verbal scale)
Family data

questionnaire

Note. WPPSI 5 Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of
Intelligence.

underneath something inside a basket, and then also
goes away. In the last scene, Sally comes back to where
the box and the basket with the ball are. Evaluation of
the task included the following steps:

1. A control question: ‘‘Did the child who went out
see the other one move the ball somewhere
else?’’ The children had to answer the control
question correctly to be able to continue (by
expressing the idea that the girl could not have
seen that her friend had put the ball somewhere
else, because she had left). If they gave a wrong
answer, the task was explained to them again
from the beginning.

2. Three evaluation questions:

(a) Prediction
question–‘‘Where will the child look for the ball
first?’’; (b) Explanation question–‘‘Why?’’; (c)
Ignorance attribution question–‘‘Did the child
really know where the ball was?’’

The children’s performance in the task was evalu-
ated according to the answers they gave to each of the
evaluation questions. The second task was the false-
belief content task used by Perner, Leekam and
Wimmer (1987). In this task the children are shown
a Smarties tube, which is shaken in front of the child
so that the contents make a noise. The child is then
asked a question about their own belief: (a) ‘‘What do
you think there is inside the tube?’’ When the child
answers (they usually say that there are Smarties or
sweets inside the tube), the tube is opened to show the
contents (which can be different things such as pencil
stubs, counters, and so forth). The tube is then closed
again and the child is asked a second question about
another child’s belief: (b) ‘‘Hey, and if another kid
came and saw the tube, what would he think was
inside it?’’ The task was counted as being correctly
performed if children gave the right answer to the
second question.

Non-literal communicative intentions. The white lie
and irony tasks, which were based on Happe´’s
‘‘Strange stories’’ (1994), were administered at Time 2
in order to evaluate the child’s understanding of non-
literal meaning. In the white lie task, the children are
shown a birthday party where the main character
(whose birthday it is) is thinking about the present he
would most like to get–a cuddly dinosaur. They are
then shown a picture in which one of his friends is
giving him a ball and the main character says, ‘‘Oh,
what a lovely ball, it’s just what I wanted!’’ Evaluation
of the task includes children’s answers to: (a) a compre-
hension question–‘‘Is it true what the boy says?’’ and
(b) a justification or explanation question–‘‘Why does
he say that?’’ In the irony task the main character is

Mothers’ Use of Cognitive State Verbs

1055

watching a group of children playing. The main
character goes over to them and asks, ‘‘Can I play with
you?’’ and one of the children answers, ‘‘Of course you
can. You can play with us when pigs learn to fly!’’
Evaluation of the task involved the same questions as
for the previous task. In both tasks (white lie and irony),
the answers the children gave to the two questions
were evaluated separately (identifying the intention of
the utterance and providing a suitable explanation).

Deception. The deception task, which was based on
Peskin’s task (1992), was administered at Time 2. The
purpose of this task was to evaluate the children’s
capacity to conceal their own wishes from another
individual in a situation in which they are competing
for the same object. The child has to choose what kind
of information he or she is going to give (true or false),
depending on who the other character is. First of all,
the child is shown a set of stickers and is asked to
point to the one he or she wants to keep at the end of
the task. Once the child has pointed to the sticker he or
she likes best, he or she is shown the two dolls who are
going to compete with them for the sticker, but in the
following order: A, who is a cooperator, and B,
a competitor. Both the dolls appear during the task,
and each of them asks the child what his or her
favorite sticker is. The cooperator, A, will always take
away a sticker other than the one pointed out by the
child, whereas the competitor, B, always ends up with
the sticker the child pointed to. If the child does not
get his or her favorite sticker, the first time around, the
task is repeated up to a maximum of six attempts. In
each new attempt, the child is made to understand
that he or she cannot get the sticker because doll B, the
competitor, has taken the one the child had chosen
when asked which sticker he or she liked most
(‘‘What’s happened? You didn’t get the sticker you
liked best because this doll has taken it’’) and the
instructions are repeated (‘‘Of course, the two dolls
want a sticker as well, don’t they? They’re going to
come and ask you which one you like most. But this
doll, the first one that asks you, will always take away
a different sticker to the one you pointed out, whereas
the second always ends up with the sticker you chose.
Right, let’s see. Now you’ve got another chance to get
your sticker. Think and see what you can do’’).

Certainty. The certainty task, which was based on
Merdrignac and Deleau’s task (1997), was adminis-
tered at Time 2. The purpose of this task was to
evaluate the children’s capacity to understand the
difference between the verbs ‘‘believe’’ and ‘‘know’’
and their relation to the degree of certainty we have
about a particular fact. The child is shown a scene in
which a sheep is fleeing from a wolf and hides in three
different places (three little houses), one after the

1056 Adria´n, Clemente, and Villanueva

other. In all three places, the sheep leaves ‘‘hoof
prints’’ at the entrances to the houses, and when the
wolf arrives, he sees them. In the first situation, the
sheep hides in a house that stands on its own some
way away from the others and stays inside it. In the
second situation, she hides in a house that is con-
nected to another by an outside passageway but stays
inside the first one. In the third situation, she goes into
the same house as in the previous situation but, once
inside, she goes along the passageway to the other
house and stays inside it. Evaluation of the task
involved asking the child a belief question for each
situation (‘‘Does the wolf believe the sheep is inside
this house?’’) and a knowledge question (‘‘Does the
wolf know the sheep is inside this house?’’). Evalua-
tion of successful completion of the task was estab-
lished according to the answers to the questions that
were asked in the third situation, which was the one
that posed a higher level of uncertainty. Thus, correct
answers were taken as being those in which the child
said that the wolf would think that the sheep was in
either of the two houses that were joined by the
outside passageway but could not know for sure in
which.

Picture-book reading tasks. The mothers read the
children four stories at Time 1. These four stories had
been used by the authors in a previous study, and
they present different events with an obvious men-
talistic content–that is, false beliefs, deceits, lies, and
so forth. The first story was a commercial version of
‘‘Snow White’’ with the printed text removed. The
story had six pages that gave a brief outline of the
main events in the story: when the queen looks at
herself in the mirror and asks who is the fairest in the
land, when the mirror tells her that the fairest of all is
Snow White, when the queen orders a hunter to kill
Snow White in the woods, and so on. The other three
were stories designed by the researchers. They were
made up of a maximum of four to five drawings with
minimal supporting text: the title and short narrative
notes (e.g., ‘‘and then the boy. . .,’’ ‘‘in the end. . .’’).
The first story (‘‘The story of the child who broke
a pencil case and blamed her classmate’’) shows
a classroom with three children working at their
desks. One of the children gets up and goes to talk to
one of the others sitting on the other side of the aisle.
Meanwhile, the companion who shares her desk
with her takes a pencil case from her desk and breaks
it. When the first child comes back and sits down, she
sees the broken pencil case. The teacher approaches
and asks what has happened. Then the child who
broke the pencil case points to her companion and
says that she had done it. In the second story (‘‘The
story of the dangerous bottle left unsupervised in the

kitchen’’), the children are shown a picture of a child
who arrives home from school sweating. He is very
thirsty and goes into the kitchen for a drink. He finds
a bottle and starts to drink from it, but he immedi-
ately spits out what he has drunk, because it tastes
really awful. Then his little sister comes in all hot and
sweaty too, and so the boy warns her not to drink
from that bottle, because it does not contain water
and, whatever it is, it tastes horrible. In the third
story (‘‘The boy who jumped the queue to be the first
into the cinema’’), the children are shown a picture of
a group of nursery school children walking in line
behind their teacher and holding hands. They are
going to go into a classroom to see a film on TV.
One little boy who is not in the line wants to rush in
to see the film, and he pushes in at the front of the
queue. In the doorway, as he is going into the
classroom, he bumps into a boy from the queue and
knocks him over. The teacher does not realize what
has happened, and the last scene shows the boy
sitting in front of all the others watching the film
while the boy who was pushed over is coming into
the classroom with an angry look on his face. The
order of these four picture-book reading tasks was
counterbalanced among participants.

At Time 2, mothers read the children one picture
story based on a role-taking task by Selman and Byrne
(1974), ‘‘Holly’s dilemma.’’ The original story was:

Holly is an 8-year-old girl who likes to climb trees.
She is the best tree climber in the neighbouhood.
One day while climbing down from a tall tree she
falls off the bottom branch but does not hurt
herself. Her father sees her fall. He is upset and
asks her to promise not to climb trees any more.
Holly promises. Later that day, Holly and her
friends meet Sean. Sean’s kitten is caught up in
a tree and cannot get down. Something has to be
done right away or the kitten may fall. Holly is
the only one who climbs trees well enough to reach
the kitten and get it down, but she remembers her
promise to her father.

The story was drawn and designed as a puzzle
with two different endings: in one of them, the girl
climbs the tree, rescues the cat, and her friends are
pleased, but meanwhile her father has appeared and
watches what is going on with his back towards us
(we cannot see his face). In the second ending, Holly
decides not to climb the tree and the cat falls out of tree
and hurts itself, so her friends get angry with her.
As in the previous ending, her father has also seen
what was happening. The mothers start to read the
beginning of the story to the children, and later they

have to make up and discuss both endings with them.
This task was chosen because of its obvious mentalist
content. The two different endings in the form of
a puzzle replace the questions that the children were
asked in the original task (here the child was not
evaluated). They were designed with two goals in
mind: the first sought to enhance or expand the
possibilities of the mothers’ speech (since, at Time 1,
only this story-reading task was used), and the second
was aimed at arousing the child’s interest in the task,
as it was expected that the children, being older at
Time 2, would be capable of actively collaborating
with their mothers in building up these two different
endings. The CHILDES system (MacWhinney &
Snow, 1984) was used for the narrative transcription
at both times.

Verbal ability. The verbal scale of the Wechsler
Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI)
(Wechsler, 1990) was administered at Time 1.

Mothers’ education. At the beginning of the exper-
imental session at Time 1 the mothers answered
a family data questionnaire, which included items
about their educational level.

Design

The verbal ability test (Time 1 only) and the mental
states understanding tasks were administered to the
children during the interview with their mothers,
and subsequently mothers and children read the
stories.

Scoring

Mental state understanding. At Time 1, the unex-
pected transfer task was given 0 – 3 points according
to correct answers for each of three evaluation ques-
tions (prediction, explanation, and ignorance attribu-
tion). The false-belief content task was given 0-1
points according to whether correct answers were
given to the question about another child’s belief.
Thus, the maximum score was 4. At Time 2, the white
lie and irony tasks were each given 0 – 2 points
depending on whether correct answers were obtained
for each of two evaluation questions (comprehension
and justification or explanation). The deception task
was also given 0 – 2 points, depending on whether the
task was successfully completed in the two first
attempts (2 points), in 3 or 4 attempts (1 point), and
0 points were awarded in attempts 5 and 6. Finally, the
certainty task was given 0 – 1 point depending on
whether correct answers were given to both the belief
question and the knowledge question. Thus, the
maximum score was 7 points at Time 2.

Mothers’ Use of Cognitive State Verbs

1057

Mothers’ language (picture-book reading). The cogni-
tive verbs used by mothers during picture-book
reading (e.g., think, know, remember, believe, understand,
recognize, imagine, suppose, forget, explain, expect, clarify)
were computed according to the criteria used by
Bretherton and Beeghley (1982). Therefore, terms
referring to emotional states (e.g., happy, sad, angry),
desire states (e.g., want, hope, wish), and perceptual
states (e.g., see, look, watch) were excluded from the
computation. We were interested in examining the
frequency with which cognitive verbs were used by
mothers to evaluate the effects of mothers’ additional
verbal input on children’s theory of mind (ToM)
(Ruffman et al., 2002). All cognitive state verb terms
were accounted for,
including those involved in
a number of conversational devices, such as: ‘‘I don’t
know.’’ used for impossibility to answer; ‘‘What do
you think?,’’ for turn-taking; or ‘‘Do you know?’’ to
check children’s comprehension. Such modalities
have not been included in other studies, because they
were not considered to be genuine mental state utter-
ances (e.g., Bartsch & Wellman, 1995). Other studies
have included both mental and nonmental state
references to thinking and knowing (Jenkins, Turrell,
Kogushi, Lollis & Ross, 2003; Taumoepeau &
Ruffman, 2006). With regard to mothers’ mental talk,
Taumoepeau and Ruffman (2006) argued that, al-
though mothers’ mental utterances could be construed
as conversational, they can also be taken as referring to
mental states. Here we did not examine children’s
speech as reflecting their mind comprehension, but
rather we tried to explore how general use of cognitive
state verbs (including functional aspects) by mothers
in reading-based discourse can affect their children’s
understanding of mind. Such conversational devices
may be included among the aspects of adult speech
that are believed to facilitate children’s linguistic
competence (see Introduction). Therefore, it is reason-
able to think that when these conversational uses
involve the use of cognitive verbs, they might still help
children to learn about mental states. Nevertheless, the
proportion of such modalities was calculated in order
to evaluate their impact on mothers’ discourse.

Cognitive verbs were coded in three ways. First, we
considered the verb category used, and a distinction
was made between: (a) the verb ‘‘to know,’’ referring
to the knowledge states in affirmative, negative, and
interrogative forms (e.g.,
‘‘you know that this is
a story, that it’s not true’’; ‘‘I don’t know what’s going
to happen to this boy now’’; ‘‘The little girl looked in
the satchel and do you know what she found?’’), and
also as ability (‘‘I know how to read this story’’); (b) the
verb ‘‘to think,’’ referring to mental activity (e.g., ‘‘I’m
thinking about how to do it’’) and beliefs (e.g., ‘‘she

1058 Adria´n, Clemente, and Villanueva

thinks that Snow White is dead’’); and (c) other
cognitive verbs, referring to a variety of mental
activity forms (e.g., imagine, suppose, believe, forget,
know, find out, grasp, understand, deceive, remem-
ber, and so forth). This differentiation was made due
to the special prominence of these verbs (think and
know) in the mother-child speech about mental states
(e.g., Furrow, Moore, Davidge, & Chiasson, 1992;
Bartsch & Wellman, 1995). The second category
included the subjects or referents of such verbs. In
other words, they dealt with the mental states of
whoever the mothers were referring to in the story,
and distinguished between: (d) children’s mental
states; (e) characters’ mental states; and (f) mothers’
and others’ mental states, through the use of the first
and third person plural (e.g., ‘‘This story hasn’t got
any words, we’ll have to invent them, they forgot to
put the words in this story’’) and impersonal verb
forms. And third, the function that such verbs had
within the mothers’ discourse and distinguished
between: (g) asking questions, which included all
interrogative utterances involving cognitive terms;
(h) giving explanations, which included all explica-
tive utterances in which cognitive terms were
involved, and directly oriented towards the facts,
actions and behaviors from the story; and (i) other
functions, which included all other possibilities, such
as reflections from the reading (e.g., ‘‘I don’t know if
I’ve explained this to you very well, darling’’), moral
conclusions (e.g.,
‘‘So now you know that you
shouldn’t drink from a bottle when you don’t know
what it’s got inside it, all right?), and exclamatory and
imperative utterances (e.g., ‘‘You remember this story
really well, don’t you? We‘ve got it at home!’’; ‘‘Will
you please pay attention to me!’’). These three broad
categories were used in order to cover both narrative
features of reading (describing and explaining actions
and behaviors) and a number of characteristics of
adult speech directed towards children, such as
frequent questions (e.g., yes-no, what, attribute, fill-
in-the-blank, open-ended, high-level distancing) or
contingent feedback for children’s speech (e.g., repe-
tition, praise, correction, expansion, topic continua-
tion). A primary coder used the transcriptions and
audiotapes to code all cognitive verbs and categories.
Subsequently, a second person coded 30% of the
transcripts. Interrater reliability assessment of cate-
gories of cognitive verbs used by mothers on reading
produced a kappa coefficient that ranged from 0.85 to
0.97, indicating good agreement.

Verbal ability. The raw scores on the WPPSI were

used to compute children’s verbal ability.

Mothers’ education. The educational level of moth-
ers was coded on a 3-point scale as a measure of

socioeconomic status. The scoring was: 1 5 Certificate
of Primary Education; 2 5 Certificate of Secondary
Education; 3 5 University graduate.

Results

Table 2 shows a summary of the descriptive statistics
for the mental state understanding and verbal ability
tasks, mothers’ use of cognitive terms, and mothers’
educational level. One mother and her child were
excluded from the sample because the mother’s
cognitive verbs were more than 3 SDs above the mean
in Time 1 data.

Performance on Mental State Understanding Tasks

At Time 1, the children found the ‘‘unexpected
content’’ task easier than the ‘‘unexpected change of
object’’ task (83% right answers vs. 52.5% of children
that scored 3 points in the second task). The correla-
tion of the scores between the two tests, however, was
significant: r (40) 5 .42, p , .01. At Time 2, the most
difficult tasks for the children were the two that
evaluated their comprehension of utterances or ex-
changes with nonliteral meanings. In the white lie
task, 15% of children scored 0 points, 47.5% got 1
point, and 27.5% scored the maximum, 2 points. In the
irony tasks, 5% scored 0 points, 60% 1 point, and 25% 2
points. The other two tasks, deception and certainty,
were seen to have an intermediate degree of difficulty
(47.5% of children scored the maximum in both tasks).
Four of the six possible correlations between the
scores in the different tests at Time 2 were found to
be significant. Because of these correlations between
the mental state understanding tasks, performance
was collapsed to form a composite measure at the two
time points. The correlation between these overall
scores was (Time 1 to Time 2), r(36) 5 .46, p , .01.

Mothers’ Use of Cognitive Verbs

Mothers’ use of cognitive verbs at both times
displays a number of relevant characteristics (see
Tables 2 and 3). First, the frequency of cognitive verbs
was higher at Time 1. This was due to the fact that
more picture-book reading tasks were carried out at
Time 1 than at Time 2 (four stories at Time 1 versus one
story at Time 2), which therefore means more exten-
sive reading for the mothers and, consequently, more
opportunities to use cognitive verbs. In turn, the
proportion was higher at Time 2, because mothers
tended to use more mental terms per total number
of words used when their children’s chances of

Table 2
Descriptive Statistics of Key Measures

Mental state understanding
False-belief content task
False-belief transfer task
White lie
Irony
Deception
Certainty
Total
Mothers’ use of cognitive verbs
Percentagea
WPPSI
Mothers’ educational level

Mothers’ Use of Cognitive State Verbs

1059

Time 1

Time 2

M (SD)

Range

M (SD)

Range

0.83 (0.38)
1.90 (1.29)

2.72 (1.50)
11.95 (7.57)
0.90
64.23 (16.00)
2.15 (0.83)

0 – 1
0 – 3

0 – 4
1 – 34

30 – 96
1 – 3

1.13 (0.68)
1.22 (0.54)
1.30 (0.82)
0.52 (0.50)
4.19 (1.86)
3.50 (2.72)
1.19

0 – 2
0 – 2
0 – 2
0 – 1
0 – 7
0 – 10

Note. The mean proportion of correct answers is shown for each theory-of-mind task with range 5 0 – 1.
aPercentage of overall mother talk.

understanding mental utterances (and mind under-
standing) were greater. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy
that mothers’ mental talk did not show a significant
correlation with age of children and general verbal

Table 3
Frequency of Mothers’ Use of Cognitive Verbs by Categories

Time 1

Time 2

M (SD)
Range

%*

M (SD)
Range

%*

4.83 (4.67)

0.36

0.64 (0.89)

0.23

0 – 23

0 – 3

2.08 (1.50)

0.16

0.69 (1.03)

0.24

0 – 5

0 – 4

Verb category

Know

Think

Other verbs

5.05 (3.26)

0.38

2.08 (2.15)

0.72

0 – 12

0 – 7

Referent

Children

4.65 (5.11)

0.35

2.00 (1.95)

0.68

0 – 23

0 – 7

Characters

5.30 (3.23)

0.40

0.89 (1.19)

0.28

1 – 13

0 – 4

Mothers and Others

2.00 (1.71)

0.15

0.64 (1.01)

0.23

0 – 7

0 – 3

Function
Asking

4.33 (4.62)

0.33

2.03 (1.81)

0.70

0 – 22

0 – 8

Explaining

5.68 (3.54)

0.43

0.42 (0.80)

0.14

0 – 13

0 – 3

Other functions

1.95 (2.19)

0.14

1.03 (1.10)

0.35

0 – 10

0 – 10

*Percentage of overall mother talk.

ability at any time (see Table 4). Differences in fre-
quencies and proportions of cognitive verbs did not
stop mothers from being, in general, consistently high
or low users of cognitive state verbs throughout the
data from the two time points. Correlations of the total
use of cognitive verbs by mothers (Time 1 to Time 2)
were significant: r (36) 5 .41, p , .05. On the other
hand, the proportion of cognitive verbs involved in
conversational uses (e.g., asking questions involving
effective turn-taking into mother-child interactions)
was also computed and moderate percentages were
found (Time 1: 11%; Time 2: 15%). Since the percen-
tages were moderate and, in any case, they may be
facilitators of children’s understanding of mental talk
from mothers (as we reasoned above), they were not
partialled out in subsequent analysis.

By categories, at Time 1, mothers employed the
verbs ‘‘know’’ and ‘‘think’’ on 57% of the total
number of occasions in which cognitive verbs were
used. Yet, this percentage dropped to 35% at Time 2.
On the one hand, these data confirm the especially
significant role played by these two verbs in stating
and marking cognitive processes (e.g., Furrow et al.,
1992; Bartsch & Wellman, 1995). On the other
hand, however, the decrease between Times 1 and 2
in favor of other verbs is consistent with the
increased development of children’s understanding
of mental verbs in these years, as pointed out by
the studies mentioned in the Introduction. Thus,
mothers adjusted their vocabulary to the children’s
ability to understand.

Second, mothers’ references to the children’s men-
tal states were more frequent at Time 2 (Time 1: 36%;

1060 Adria´n, Clemente, and Villanueva

Table 4
Zero Order Correlations Between Key Measures

Time 1

Time 2

1.CUMS
2. MCV
3. AC
4. CVA
5. ME
6. CUMS
7. MCV
8. AC

1

—
.36*
.77**
.65**
.17
.46**
.17
.67**

Time 1

Time 2

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

—
.21
.14
.34*
.45**
.41*
.08

—
.81**
.08
62**
.27
.89**

—
.00
.60**
.16
.83**

—
 .05
.25
 .09

—
y
.30
.61**

—
.10

CUMS: Children’s understanding of mental states.
MCV: Mothers’ cognitive verbs.
AC: Age of children.
ME: Maternal education.
CVA: Children’s verbal ability.
Note. Quartiles of mothers’ cognitive verbs (MCV) at Time 1 were used in correlations.
*p , .05, **p , .01,

p , .10 (All significance tests are two-tailed).

y

Time 2: 55%). It must be remembered that at Time 2
mothers had to read but also put a puzzle picture-
book together with their children. This situation
forced them to establish more interactions with their
children (e.g., Do you believe that this piece goes here?).
Finally, mothers asked questions more frequently at
Time 2, but not only as the most direct instrument to
carry out puzzle-based interactions with their chil-
dren, but also as a narrative strategy and procedure to
resolve the puzzle storybook reading task at hand.

results were consistent with a well-established asso-
ciation between general use of mental talk by mothers
and children’s understanding of mental states at two
time points. By categories, the tendency to correlate
was greater at Time 1. In addition, no category was
found to be correlated at both times, and this did not
appear to be associated with a greater or lower

Table 5
Correlations and Partial Correlations Between Mothers’ Use of Cognitive
Verbs and Children’s Understanding of Mental States (Time 1 and Time 2)

Relations Between Mothers’ Use of Cognitive Verbs and
Children’s Understanding of Mental States

Table 4 shows zero-order correlations between the
variables studied at the two time points. Because
cognitive verbs were more frequent at Time 1 than
at Time 2, all related measures (the total number of
cognitive verbs and the categories at Time 1) were
broken down into quartiles and used in correlation
analyses. Zero-order correlations showed that chil-
dren’s verbal ability correlated with their understand-
ing of mental states (Time 1: r (40) 5 .65, p , .001; Time
2: r (36) 5 .60, p , .001), as has been well documented
in the literature. On the other hand, mothers’ educa-
tional level was found to be correlated with their use
of cognitive terms at Time 1, r (40) 5 .34, p , .05. In the
subsequent correlational analyses, the effects of co-
variates were considered jointly in order to provide
a more powerful analysis.

Within-time point correlations. Table 5 shows the
correlations and the partial correlations between
mothers’ use of cognitive verbs and children’s under-
standing of mental states (Time 1 and Time 2). The

Time 1
(n 5 40)

Time 2
(n 5 36)

Variables

Total cognitive verbs
Verb category

Know
Think
Other verbs

Referent

Children
Characters
Mothers and Others

Function
Asking
Explaining
Other functions

r

.36**

.09
.11
.43**

.32*
.17
.20

.20
.27*
.34*

pra

.33*

y
.21
.14
.30*

.37*
y
.23
.01

y
.23
.30*
.23*

r

.30*

.12
.44**
.14

.17
y
.24
.17

.14
.11
y
.27

prb

.30*

.20
.50**
.07

.22
.14
.11

.18
 .05
.15

Note. Quartiles of all measures of cognitive verbs were used in
correlations at Time 1.
aPartial correlation after controlling for children’s age, verbal
ability, and maternal education at Time 1.
bPartial correlation after controlling for verbal ability and maternal
education at Time 1, and children’s age at Ttime 2.
*p , .05, **p , .01,

p , .10 (All significance tests are one-tailed).

y

frequency of these variables in data from each or both
time points (see Table 3 above).

Longitudinal relations. Table 6 shows the correla-
tions and partial correlations between mothers’ use of
cognitive verbs at Time 1 (in quartiles) and children’s
understanding of mental states at Time 2. Results
pointed to reliable relations between earlier general
and specific mental talk by mothers about picture-
book reading and children’s development in the
understanding of mental states one year later. In
contrast, the reverse relation did not hold (Table 6
again). It is true, however, that from the original data
there was wider variance when going from early
mother talk to later children’s ToM than when going
in the opposite direction. This means that correlations
for the first association are likely to be larger, and this
is why we used quartiles of all measures from mother
talk at Time 1, as we pointed out previously. The
variance of mother talk measures therefore remained
even smaller at Time 1 (s2 5 1.22 for total cognitive
verbs, and s2 5 1.17 for the average of the variances
from categories) than at Time 2 (s2 5 7.40 and s2 5
1.99, respectively), whereas variance of ToM mea-
sures was 2.71 at Time 1, and 3.47 at Time 2. Thus,

Table 6
Correlations and Partial Correlations Between Mothers’ Use of Cognitive
Verbs (MUCV) and Children’s Understanding of Mental States (CUMS)
(Time 1 to Time 2)

Time 1 MUCV to

Time 2 CUMS

Time 1 CUMS to
Time 2 MUCV

(n 5 36)

(n 5 36)

Variables

Total cognitive verbs
Verb category

Know
Think
Other verbs

Referent

Children
Characters
Mothers and Others

Function
Asking
Explaining
Other functions

r

.45**

y
.22
.45**
y
.26

.24+
.42**
.22+

y
.25
.39**
.29*

pra

.53**

.33*
.53**
.20

.33*
.57***
.20

.33*
.49**
.29*

r

.17

.11
 .06
.17

.13
.17
.03

.01
.31*
.15

prb
 .19

.09
 .38*
 .09

.02
 .18
 .28

 .20
.16
 .16

Note. Quartiles of all measures of cognitive verbs were used in
partial correlations at Time 1 MUCV to Time 2 CUMS.
aPartial correlation after controlling for CUMS, verbal ability, and
maternal education at Time 1, and children’ s age at Time 2.
bPartial correlation after controlling for MUCV, verbal ability, and
maternal education at Time 1, and children’s age at Time 2.
*p , .05, **p , .01, ***p , .001,
one-tailed).

y
p , .10 (All significance tests are

Mothers’ Use of Cognitive State Verbs

1061

when going from early mother talk to later children’s
ToM in the correlations, the variance of measures
were 1.22 and 1.17 versus 3.47, and in the opposite
direction correlations were 2.71 versus 7.40 and 1.99.
If variance differences were decisive for the analyses,
we would expect to find a significant correlation
between the children’s early ToM (s2 5 2.71) and later
general mother talk (s2 5 7.40), but this is not the case.
This suggests that the pattern of relations found is
probably not due to differences in measures.

At this point, an asymmetric pattern of correlations
within mothers’ utterances can again be observed (as
happened the first time with the within time-point
correlations) regarding their association with the chil-
dren’s present or later understanding of mental states
(Time 1 and Times 1 to 2). Whereas the measures of the
categories of mental state talk by mothers were identi-
cal (from Time 1), only two categories were related to
both present and later understanding of mental states
by children (explanations by mothers and other func-
tions). A factorial analysis was conducted on mothers’
utterances at Time 1 in order to examine whether such
differences reflect different levels in their discourse as
regards their association with the children’s under-
standing of mental states (Table 7). Results from facto-
rial analysis distinguished two main factors in mothers’
cognitive discourse at Time 1. Factor 1 explained
52.48% of the variance observed, and included six of
the nine variables: cognitive verbs other than ‘‘know’’
and ‘‘think,’’ mothers’ references to children’s mental
states, ‘‘know’’ verbs, mothers’ asking questions, refer-
ences to mothers’ and others’ mental states, and
functions other than asking and explaining. Factor 2
explained 22.17% of the variance, and included the

Table 7
Factorial Analysis for Mothers’ Use of Cognitive Verbs at Time 1

Factors

1

2

Category

(52.48% of variance)

(22.17% of variance)

Other verbs
Children’s mental

states

Know
Asking
Mothers’ and others’

mental states
Other functions
Characters’ mental

states

Explaining
Think

.873
.870

.869
.816
.624

.617
.623

.677
.407

Extraction method: principal components analysis.

 .131
 .287

 .080
 .282
 .432

 .417
.742

.680
.660

1062 Adria´n, Clemente, and Villanueva

other three variables: mothers’ references to characters’
mental
states, explanations, and ‘‘think’’ verbs.
Although these three variables also loaded high for
the first factor, there were several reasons to think that
such factors were useful. First, these factors seemed to
point at two main focuses of mother’s attention in
reading: the children (Factor 1) and the actions of the
characters (Factor 2), which is consistent with the
communicative context of
the picture-book tasks.
Moreover, both factors explained a satisfactory per-
centage of variance (over 75%), the inflection point in
the graph of sedimentation was between Factor 2 to 3,
and 8 out of 10 random trials conducted with half of the
sample showed similar outcomes. Finally, no benefits
were found in factor rotation (e.g., Varimax), because
the variables were distributed in the same way. Table 8
shows some examples of mothers’ utterances according
to the factors that were analyzed.

Regression analyses (Table 9) were conducted to
compare the contribution both the total number of
cognitive verbs and the factors of the cognitive verbs
made to the prediction of children’s present and later
understanding of mental states (Time 1 and Time 1
to 2). For each factor in the solution (Factor 1 and Factor
2), factor score coefficients were computed according
to the regression method. Such coefficients were added
in form of new variables from the data, and used in the
regression analyses. At Time 1, the two models of linear
regression were performed after controlling for child-
ren’s age, children’s verbal ability, and mothers’ edu-
cation. Results showed that both cognitive verbs and
Factor 1 were significant predictors of children’s pres-
ent understanding of mental states, and they helped to
explain identical additional variance (8%). General
models were also significant: Model 1: F (4, 35) 5
12.88, r 5 .77, p , .001; Model 2: F (5, 34) 5 10.09, r 5 .77,
p , .001. At Times 1 to 2, the two models were
performed after controlling for age of children at Time
2 and children’s verbal ability, understanding of mental
states, and mothers’ education at Time 1. Results again
showed that both cognitive verbs and Factor 1 pre-
dicted children’s later understanding of mental states,
although Factor 1 accounted for greater variance. In
addition, Factor 2 was also a significant predictor and
contributed to account for 6% of the additional variance
after-effects of Factor 1 and covariates. General models
were also significant: Model 1: F (5, 30) 5 6.96, r 5 .73, p
, .001; Model 2: F (6, 29) 5 8.19, r 5 .79, p ,.001.

Discussion

The present study had two main goals. First, we
aimed to address the relations between mothers’

Table 8
Examples of Mothers’ Utterances According to Factors for Mothers’ Use of
Cognitive Verbs at Time 1

Factor 1

-‘‘This is just a story, it’s not true–you know that kings and queens

only exist in stories, don’t you?’’ (‘‘Snow White’’).

- ‘‘This story hasn’t got words, we’ll have to invent them, they’ve
forgotten to put the words in this story, oh but I know them! They
don’t explain anything but I know them, I’ll tell you! ’’(‘‘Snow
White’’).

- ‘‘The little girl looked in the satchel and do you know what she

found?’’ (‘‘The girl who broke a pencil case and blamed her classmate’’).
- ‘‘Because if you drink from a bottle of bleach or soap, you can hurt
yourself, a lot, right?, and on top of that if you drink a lot and it’s
very bad, you might even die, so imagine how dangerous it is!
Whenever you drink from bottles you have to know what they‘ve
got inside them and if you don’t know what it is, you mustn‘t
touch it or drink it.’’ (‘‘The dangerous bottle left unsupervised in the
kitchen’’).

Factor 2

- ‘‘The Queen thought that Snow White was dead, so she went to
the mirror and said, ‘Mirror, mirror on the wall, who’s the fairest
of them all?’’’ (‘‘Snow White’’).

- ‘‘No, here it is in the picture, which is as if she was thinking, what
she’s saying is as though it was what she thinks – that it was Juan
who broke the . . . the pencil case, the things inside the pencil case,
so that she can blame him . . . and that’s the end of the story.’’ (‘‘The
girl who broke a pencil case and blamed her classmate’’).

- ‘‘No, she’s sweating, darling, she’s not crying, she’s sweating, so
Ana thinks that as she’s so thirsty she’ll drink that as well–that’s
right, petrol–but she grabs it and says that she mustn’t drink from
that bottle.’’ (‘‘The dangerous bottle left unsupervised in the kitchen’’).
- ‘‘Can you see through that door? That’s the way into the cinema
and all the children were there, all the children queuing up and
this boy sees so many people and thinks, ‘I’ll pretend I don’t
know what’s going on and I’ll push in the front of the queue.’’’
(‘‘The boy who jumped the queue to be the first into the cinema’’).

mental talk and the understanding of mental states
by older children beyond ‘‘the age / stage fixation of 4
years,’’ as Carpendale & Lewis (2004) stated. Com-
plementarily, we also sought to examine several
aspects of maternal input that were thought to be
critical
in promoting children’s understanding of
mental states. With regard to the first goal, and as
predicted, a correlation was found between mothers’
early use of cognitive state verbs and children’s later
understanding of mental states, after controlling for
a number of potential covariates, such as children’s
early understanding of mental states, children’s
age, verbal ability, and maternal education. Yet,
the reverse pattern did not hold: children’s early

Table 9
Summary of Regression Statistics Predicting Children’s Understanding of
Mental States

Variable

Time 1 (n 5 40)

B

t

R2 and
D R2

rp

Model 1
Step 1: children’s age, verbal ability,

and mothers’ education

Step 2: mothers’ cognitive verbs
Model 2
Step 1: children’s age, verbal ability,

and mothers’ education

.51

.30

2.65*

.08

.40

.51

Step 2: Factor 1, mothers’ use of

.31

2.66*

.08

.41

cognitive verbs

Step 3: Factor 2, mothers’ use of

.03

.34

.00

.05

cognitive verbs

Time 1 to Time 2 (n 5 36)

Model 1
Step 1: children’s age (Time 2),

verbal ability, understanding of
mental states, and mothers’
education at Time 1

Step 2: mothers’ cognitive verbs
Model 2
Step 1: children’s age (Time 2),

verbal ability, understanding of
mental states, and mothers’
education at Time 1

.41

.42

2.82**

.12

.45

.41

Step 2: Factor 1, mothers’ use of

.47

3.29**

.15

.51

cognitive verbs

Step 3: Factor 2, mothers’ use of

.25

2.18*

.06

.37

cognitive verbs

Note. b 5 standardized regression coefficient; R2 5 proportion of
variance explained by a variable; D R2 5 additional variance
explained by a variable; pr 5 partial correlation.
*p , .05, **p , .01.

understanding of mental states did not correlate with
mothers’ later use of cognitive verbs, after controlling
for mothers’ early use of cognitive verbs, children’s
age and verbal ability, and maternal education. This
was true while both measures of mothers’ cognitive
verbs correlated across the two time points, and both
measures of children’s understanding of mental
states did the same. This means that mothers and
children displayed a consistently high or low level in
their use of cognitive state language and in their
abilities for mental understanding,
respectively.
These results provide, for the first time, longitudinal
evidence to think that mothers’ mental discourse may
still be critical to facilitate later developments of
children’s understanding of mental states.

These results therefore replicate and extend pre-
vious findings from related studies, especially those

Mothers’ Use of Cognitive State Verbs

1063

least,

the early school years,

by Ruffman et al. (2002), and de Rosnay et al. (2004).
On the one hand, comparison with Ruffman et al.’s
results suggests that the effects of mothers’ mental
talk may be a process that continues from infancy to,
at
thus persisting
throughout the increasing number of social relations
established by children in those years. Because the
effects of children’s understanding of mental states
were controlled in all three studies, the mothers’
effects appear to be genuine. It might be reasonable
to assume that mothers perhaps perceive such abili-
ties and adjust their mental talk input to the children
accordingly.

On the other hand, comparison with de Rosnay
et al.’s (2004) results highlighted two other questions.
First, in their study, mothers’ mental talk was col-
lected when children were absent, whereas in the
present work it was obtained from joint picture-book
reading with children. Therefore, findings from the
two studies together may suggest
that mothers’
effects are not a result of a conversational style on
the part of the child (e.g., the child’s interest in story
book characters), which is in line with arguments
already posed by de Rosnay et al. (2004). Again, it may
be reasonable to think that mothers perceive such
different interests in the children and adjust their
conversational style accordingly. The critical variation
among mothers appears to be linguistic, which might
be measurable in different contexts (de Rosnay et al.,
2004; Harris, 2005). Second, the present work assessed
children’s cognitive understanding, and de Rosnay
et al.’s (2004) study assessed children’s understand-
ing of belief-based emotion. Results from the two
studies together therefore suggest that there are more
likely to be cross-domain influences from mothers’
discourse on children’s cognitive and emotion under-
standing rather than domain specificity to the mental
state talk (e.g., emotion discourse promotes emotion
understanding, and cognitive discourse promotes
cognitive understanding), as de Rosnay and Hughes
(2006) pointed out. Because this study only examined
mothers’ cognitive language, our results do not pre-
clude language effects of other mental state categories
(regarding desires, emotions, and so forth), they
simply and clearly indicate a strong relation between
frequency of mothers’ use of cognitive verbs and
children’s understanding of mental states, in line with
previously mentioned studies (Ruffman et al., 2002;
Le Sourn-Bissaoui & Deleau, 2001; Adria´n et al., 2005).
Moreover, several specific relations were found
according to the verb category, as we will see
subsequently.

With regard to the second goal of the present study,
four out of nine categories of cognitive verbs were

1064 Adria´n, Clemente, and Villanueva

found to be correlated with children’s later mental
states understanding at Time 1 (‘‘think’’ terms, refer-
ences to characters’ mental states, explanations by
mothers, and other functions). Contrary to the results
reported by Taumoepeau and Ruffman (2006), our
data indicated that there was a strong correlation
between mothers’ references to the mental states of
certain others (the characters of the story) and the
child’s later understanding of mental states, although
this relation was not so apparent in the case of
references to their children’s mental states. But chil-
dren in their study were much younger than the
children in the present study (15- to 24-month-olds
versus 3.3-7.0 years). Furthermore, their findings
concern mothers’ references to desires, whereas this
work analyzes mothers’ references to cognitive states.
Overall, it is reasonable to think that mothers’ refer-
ences to children’s mental states may be more impor-
tant when they are younger, because they may help
children to explain mental states and to better engage
in conversation. As children get older and they
develop their understanding of mental states (and
language), information about others’ mental states
may enable them to extend their advanced abilities
and perform better in an increasing number of social
interactions. Because mothers referred to characters’
mental states using primarily ‘‘think’’
terms to
explain their actions, these two categories were also
found to be correlated with children’s later under-
standing of mental states. Such relations between
categories of cognitive verbs are examined in more
detail below.

Results of bivariate and partial correlations of
cognitive verbs by categories at the different time
points (Time 1 and Time 2, and Times 1 to 2) showed
asymmetrical patterns of significant correlations. To
clarify some of these differences, as well as the general
relations between categories, a factor analysis of
cognitive verb categories at Time 1 was conducted.
Factor analyses revealed two different factors or
levels of mothers’ discourse. The first factor is the
mothers’ main discourse level (because it explained
52.48% of the data variance) and included references
to both the children’s and their own mental states, in
addition to those of others. This was achieved (pri-
marily) by asking questions and other functions
(mainly reflections from the reading) and by using
(primarily) all categories of cognitive verbs except
‘‘think’’ terms (see Table 6 for examples). Thus, moth-
ers tried to monitor (e.g., by asking questions) and to
expand (e.g., by reflections on the reading) their
children’s current state of knowledge and compre-
hension while reading the book. But since their own
mental states are included in such a process, the

mothers appeared to monitor and expand the chil-
dren’s understanding by means of a continuing
exchange between the children’s points of views
and their own. Therefore, Factor 1 of mothers’ use of
cognitive verbs may be interpreted in terms of the
mothers’ attempt to build a shared state of knowledge
or shared meaning. On the other hand, the secondary
factor (because it explained 22.17% of data variance)
included the other three categories we commented on
above, namely, mothers’ references to the characters’
mental states by means of (primarily) explanations of
the characters’ thoughts and actions from reading and
using (primarily) ‘‘think’’ terms. That is to say, this
second factor may be interpreted in terms of story
reading that deals strictly with what happens to the
characters.

Linear regression analyses were conducted to exam-
ine the relation between such factors or levels of
mothers’ reading-based discourse at Time 1 and chil-
dren’s present and later understanding of mental states.
Frequency of cognitive verbs was included in analyses
to compare the effects. Results showed that Factor 1
(that is, mothers’ attempts to build up a shared mean-
ing in the children) predicted children’s understanding
of mental states both at present and one year later,
after-effects of covariates. In turn, Factor 2, that is,
mothers’ story reading strictly limited to characters’
thoughts and actions, predicted only the children’s
understanding of mental states one year later, but after-
effects of the covariates and the first factor. It should be
noted that, at Time 1, Factor 1 explained exactly the
same proportion of data variance as the total number of
cognitive verbs used by mothers (8%). Moreover, at
Time 2, the proportion of variance explained by both
factors in mothers’ discourse was almost twice that
explained by cognitive verbs (21% vs. 12%). This meant
that the factor-based measures of mothers’ mental talk
were more sensitive than frequency of mothers’ cog-
nitive verbs for capturing the association with chil-
dren’s understanding of mental states.

In sum, such results from linear regressions sup-
ported the correlations favoring the predictive role of
mothers’ mental talk in the development of children’s
understanding of mind. Furthermore, findings about
the relation between these factors from mothers’
cognitive discourse and the child’s present and later
understanding of mental states support the notion of
a zone of proximal development in children’s abilities
to mentalize (because factors would shape the lower
and the upper level of such a zone of proximal
development), but each factor appears to play a sin-
gular role. Mothers’ attempts to build up a shared
meaning with children (first factor) is where the
greatest efforts are made in mothers’ mental talk

and is related with both what the child has already
mastered and what the child will begin to master
one year later. Accordingly, mothers’ explanations
restricted to characters’ thoughts and actions from
reading (second factor) are only related with later
mastery. Nevertheless, it is important to point out that
factorial analysis differentiates between these two
factors, but they are engaged in mothers’ discourse
in such a way that, as we have just observed, they are
dynamically intertwined in book reading. Differenti-
ated effects of such factors on the child’s present or
later understanding of mental states can therefore be
observed, as is the case of the present study, but there
are also global effects on reading that are indicated by
mothers’ general use of cognitive verbs.

Our results concerning the effects of pragmatic
features of mothers’ use of cognitive verbs on chil-
dren’s understanding of mental states do not allow us
to clarify the different possibilities commented on in
the Introduction (namely, the semantic, syntactic, and
pragmatic hypothesis) about what aspect of maternal
input is critical to children’s advancement. Results
from correlations and linear regression analyses sug-
gest a strong relation between pragmatic aspects of
mothers’ discourse and children’s understanding of
mental states. Nevertheless, the pragmatic measures
computed in the present study (referents and func-
tions) are also inherently correlated with both semantic
and syntactic features of mothers’ mental talk (because
referents and functions were related to a variety of
cognitive verbs that included mainly tensed comple-
ments). In any case, results from factor analysis and
linear regression highlighted the pragmatic features of
language and discourse that promote children’s
understanding of mental states. Such factors can be
seen as a particular way of organizing the different
mental points of view that are assembled during
picture-book reading, which is, in turn, dependent on
the communicative intentions that mothers hold dur-
ing reading. These could be, for example, to explain
characters’ actions to the children, to check their
comprehension, to express their own opinion with
regard to what happens in the story, and so forth. Such
communicative intentions are what allow mothers to
organize their discourse. Obviously, distinctive words
and reasonably marked grammatical constructions
(embedded propositions such as that) will be necessary
later on to convey the different mental states, but they
might vary according to the different communicative
intentions of the speaker and the particularities of the
language that is used. Moreover, in languages other
than English, the links between specific lexical forms
and syntactic structures and understanding theory of
mind might not be critical (Perner, Sprung, Zauner, &

Mothers’ Use of Cognitive State Verbs

1065

Haider, 2003; Cheung et al., 2004). But whatever the
language used and the specific words that are learned,
what might be critical for children’s comprehension of
mental states is to understand the communicative
intentions of adults, since they convey the different
points of view involved in social interactions. This is
consistent with a social pragmatic approach to word
learning (e.g., Tomasello, 2001) and to arguments
raised by Harris (1996, 1999, 2005).

Finally, we can also ask if mothers facilitate chil-
dren’s understanding of mental states by means of
theoretical knowledge or simulation processes. For
example, it is true that when mothers focus on charac-
ters’ thoughts and actions (Factor 2) they provide
children with fact-based knowledge about other
peoples’ mental states, but interpreting this to mean
it transmits a sort of theoretical knowledge to the
children is a rather controversial matter. Mothers
merely offer children a particular perspective (from
the characters) by explaining their behavior and actions
using specific mental verbs. That is to say, mothers
convey to children a double perspective within the
narrative–what Bruner (1986) named a ‘‘landscape of
actions’’ and a ‘‘landscape of consciousness.’’ Thus,
children have to recognize the mental states as consti-
tuting part of behavior, but this insight might be better
understood as the interpretative process of narrative
features. Similarly, the increasing acquisition of com-
municative and linguistic skills will provide children
with the tools they need to expand their interpretative
abilities. Arguably, it is only by means of such develop-
ments that children can gain access to the complexity of
the different mental states and the nuances that exist
between them, and this is just what mothers’ discourse
facilitates. With regard to simulation processes, chil-
dren’s comprehension does not appear to require
mothers to set up frequent and direct links between
children’s mental states and those of others. From our
data, mothers use this procedure in only 7% of their
cognitive utterances addressed to children’s mental
states. For example, in ‘‘The story of the dangerous bottle
left unsupervised in the kitchen’’:

Mother: ‘‘She takes it and pours some in a glass and
starts drinking. . . Good heavens! And she starts drinking
and she realizes it tastes . . . Yuck! This is awful, it’s
disgusting! It’s horrible! And she spits it all out straight
away–and it’s a good job she does spit it out! You see?
Because if you drink from a bottle of bleach or detergent,
you can hurt yourself, but really hurt yourself a lot, yeah?
And on top of that if you drink a lot and it’s very
dangerous, you can even die–so just imagine how
dangerous it is! Whenever you drink from a bottle, you
have to know what they’ve got inside them, and if you

1066 Adria´n, Clemente, and Villanueva

don’t know what they’ve got in them, you mustn’t touch
them or drink from them.

The interaction between the two factors in mothers’
discourse found in this study makes it is reasonable to
assume that the mental states of children, characters,
and mothers are linked. Yet, this is more likely to be
achieved by contrasting and coordinating the differ-
ent perspectives than by just simulating or imagin-
ing other peoples’ mental states. Nevertheless, as
Taumoepeau and Ruffman (2006) pointed out, when
children are younger, there might also be a more basic
way in which mothers could foster simulation skills,
that is, by simply talking more about the child’s
mental states from the outset. Again, it may therefore
be that different processes can be important in differ-
ent moments of children’s development.

To summarize, the findings of the present work
support the idea that exposure to discourse about
mental states can facilitate the continued develop-
ment of children’s understanding of mind beyond the
age of 4 years. Moreover, this study attempts to
analyze specific procedures about how mothers artic-
ulate their discourse in order to communicate differ-
ent mental perspectives to their children. Overall, this
picture might be consistent with a social interaction
approach to the development of children’s social and
psychological understanding. In particular, the re-
sults might fit well with the concept of entering
a community of minds (Nelson, Plesa, & Henseler,
1998; Nelson et al., 2003). According to this point of
view, children’s advancement
in social cognitive
development are seen ‘‘as a product of social, dialog-
ical, and linguistic experiences that lead the child into
a new experiential space, where mental activities are
salient, enabling new access to previously inaccessi-
ble sources of knowledge: (Nelson et al., 2003, pp. 24-
25). Children have to realize that minds communicate
and differ in the knowledge and perspectives they
have of this shared world, which is precisely what has
been revealed in this singular triangle consisting of
mothers, storybooks, and children.

References

Adria´n, J. E., Clemente, R. A, Villanueva, L., & Rieffe, C.
(2005). Parent-child picture-book reading, mothers’
mental state language and children’s theory of mind.
Journal of Child Language, 32, 673 – 686.

Astington, J. (1996). What is theoretical about the child’s
theory of mind? A Vigotskian view of its development.
In P. Carruthers & P. Smith (Eds.), Theories of theory of
mind (pp.184 – 199). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.

Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. M. (1995). Children talk about the

mind. New York: Oxford University Press.

Booth, J. R., & Hall, W. S. (1994). Role of the cognitive
internal state lexicon in reading comprehension. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 86, 413 – 422.

Bretherton, I., & Beeghley, M. (1982). Talking about internal
states: The acquisition of an explicit theory of mind.
Developmental Psychology, 18, 906 – 921.

Bruner, J. (1983). Child’s talk: Learning to use language.

New York: Norton.

Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, Possible worlds. Cambridge,

MA: Harvard University Press.

Carpendale,

J., & Lewis, Ch.

(2004). Constructing an
understanding of mind: The development of children’s
social understanding within social interaction. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 27, 79 – 151.

Chapman, M. (1999). Constructivism and the problem of
reality. Journal of Applied Development Psychology, 20, 31 – 43.
Cheung, H., et al. (2004). Relative roles of general and
complementation language in theory-of-mind develop-
ment: Evidence from Cantonese and English. Child
Development, 75, 1155 – 1170.

D’Andrade, R. (1987). A folk model of the mind. In
D. Holland & N. Quinn (Eds.), Cultural models in language
and thought (pp. 112 – 148). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

de Rosnay, M., & Hugues, C. (2006). Conversation and
theory of mind: Do children talk their way to socio-
cognitive understanding? British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 24, 7 – 37.

de Rosnay, M., Pons, F., Harris, P. L., & Morrell, J. M. B.
(2004). A lag between understanding false belief
and emotion attribution in young children: Relationships
with linguistic ability and mothers’ mental-state lan-
guage. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 22,
197 – 218.

de Villiers, J. G., & de Villiers, P. A. (2000). Linguistic
determinism and the understanding of false beliefs. In
P. Mitchell & K. J. Riggs (Eds.), Children’s reasoning and
the mind (pp.191 – 228). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.

Dunn,

Dunn, J., Brown, J., & Beardsall, L. (1991). Family talk about
feeling states and children’s later understanding of
other’s emotions. Developmental Psychology, 27, 448 – 455.
J., Slomkowski, C., Tesla, C., &
Youngblade, L. (1991). Young children’s understanding
of other people’s feelings and beliefs: Individual dif-
ferences and their antecedents. Child Development, 62,
1352 – 1366.

J., Brown,

Dyer, J. R., Shatz, M., & Wellman, H. M. (2000). Young
children’s storybooks as a source of mental state infor-
mation. Cognitive Development, 15, 17 – 37.

Frank, R. E., & Hall, W. S. (1991). Polysemy and the
acquisition of the cognitive internal state lexicon. Journal
of Psycholinguistic Research, 20, 283 – 304.

Furrow, D., Moore, C., Davidge, J., & Chiasson, L. (1992).
Mental terms in mothers’ and children’s speech: Simi-
larities and relationships. Journal of Child Language, 19,
617 – 631.

Happe´, F. G. E. (1994). An advanced test of theory of mind:
Understanding of story characters thoughts and feelings
by able autistic, mentally handicapped, and normal
children and adults. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 24, 129 – 154.

Harris, P.

(1996). Desires, beliefs, and language.

In
P. Carruthers, P. K. Smith (Eds.), Theories of theories
of mind (pp.200 – 220). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

Harris, P. (1999). Acquiring the art of conversation: Child-
ren’s developing conception of their conversation partner.
In M. Bennett (Ed.), Developmental psychology: Achievements
and prospects (pp.89 – 105). London: Psychology Press.

Harris, P. (2005). Conversation, pretense, and theory of
mind. In J. W. Astington & J. A. Baird (Eds.), Why
language matters for theory of mind (pp. 70 – 83). New
York: Oxford University Press.

Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1991). Mother-child conversation in
different social classes and communicative settings.
Child Development, 62, 782 – 796.

Jenkins, J. M., Turrell, S. L., Kogushi, Y., Lollis, S., & Ross, H. S.
(2003). A longitudinal investigation of the dynamics of
mental state talk in families. Child Development, 74, 905 – 920.
(2001). Discours
maternel et compre´hension des e´tats mentaux e´motion-
nels et cognitifs a 3 ans. Enfance, 53, 329 – 348.

Le Sourn-Bissaoui, S., & Deleau, M.

Lillard, A. S. (1998). Ethnopsychologies: Cultural variations

in theories of mind. Psychological Bulletin, 123, 3 – 32.

MacWhinney, B., & Snow, C. (1984). CHILDES (CHIld
Language Data Exchange System). Carnegie Mellon
University (Pittsburgh).

Merdrignac, V., & Deleau, M. (1997). Theory of mind and
comprehension of mental verbs in preschool children.
Paper presented at the VIII European Conference on
Developmental Psychology, Rennes, France, September
1997.

Moore, C. H., Pure, K. & Furrow, D. (1990). Children’s
understanding of the modal expressions of speaker
certainty and uncertainty ands its relations to the
developing of a representational theory of mind. Child
Development, 61, 722 – 730.

Nelson, K., et al. (2003) Entering a community of minds:
An experiential approach to ‘‘theory of mind.’’ Human
Development, 46, 24 – 46.

Nelson, K., Plesa, D., & Henseler, S. (1998). Children’s
theory of mind: An experiential interpretation. Human
Development 41, 7 – 29.

Olson, D. R. (1988). On the origins of beliefs and other
intentional states in children. In J. W. Astington, P. L.
Harris, & D. R. Olson (Eds), Developing theories of mind
(pp. 414 – 426). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Olson, D. R., & Astington, J. W. (1990). Talking about text:
How literacy contributes to thought. Journal of Pragmatics,
14, 705 – 721.

Perner, J., Leekam, S., & Wimmer, H. (1987). Three-year-olds’
difficulty with false belief: The case for a conceptual deficit.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 5, 125 – 137.

Mothers’ Use of Cognitive State Verbs

1067

Perner, J., Sprung, M., Zauner, P., & Haider, H. (2003).
Want that is understood well before say that, think that,
and false belief: A test of de Villiers’s linguistic deter-
minism on German – speaking children. Child Develop-
ment, 74, 179 – 188.

Peskin, J. (1992). Ruse and representations: On children’s
ability to conceal information. Developmental Psychology,
28, 84 – 89.

Ratner, N. K., & Olver, R. (1998). Reading a tale of
deception, learning a theory of mind? Early Childhood
Research Quarterly, 13, 219 – 239.

Ruffman, T., Slade, L., & Crowe, E. (2002). The relation
between children’s and mother’s mental state language
and theory-of-mind understanding. Child Development,
73, 734 – 751.

Sabbagh, M. A. & Callanan, M. A. (1998). Metarepresenta-
tion in action: 3, 4, and 5-year-olds’ developing theories
of mind in parent-child conversations. Developmental
Psychology, 34, 491 – 502.

Schwanenflugel, P. J., Fabricius, W. F., Noyes, C. R., Bigler,
K., & Alexander, J. M. (1994). The organization of mental
verbs and folk theories of knowing. Journal of Memory
and Language, 33, 376 – 395.

Schwanenflugel, P. J., Henderson, R. L., & Fabricius, W. V.
(1998). Developing organization of mental verbs and
theory of mind in middle childhood: evidence from
extensions. Developmental Psychology, 34, 512 – 524.

Selman, R. L. & Byrne, D. F.

(1974). A structural-
developmental analysis of levels of role taking in middle
childhood. Child Development, 45, 803 – 806.

Snow, C. E., & Ferguson, C. A. (Eds.). 1977. Talking to
children: Language input and acquisition. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Symons, D. K., Peterson, C. C., Slaughter, V., Roche, J., &
Doyle, E. (2005). Theory of mind and mental state
discourse during book reading and story-telling
tasks. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 23,
81 – 102.

Taumoepeau, M., & Ruffman, T. (2006). Mother and infant
talk about mental states relates to desire language
and emotion understanding. Child Development, 77,
465 – 481.

Tomasello, M. (2001). Perceiving intentions and learning
words in the second year of life. In M. Tomasello &
E. Bates (Eds.), Language development: The essential read-
ings (pp. 111 – 28). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.

Wechsler, D. (1990). Escala de inteligencia para preescolar y

primaria (4th ed). Madrid: TEA.

Whitehurst, C. J., & DeBaryshe, B. D. (1989). Observational
learning and language acquisition: Principles of learn-
ing, systems, and tasks. In: G. E. Speidel & K. E. Nelson
(Eds.), The many faces of imitation in language learning
(pp.251 – 276). New York: Springer-Verlag.

Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
Representations and constraining function of wrong
beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception.
Cognition, 13, 103 – 128.


The ENd of Document.