Developmental  Psychology
1999,  Vol.  35, No. 5,  1311-1320

Copyright  1999 by  the  American  Psychological  Association,  Inc.
0012-1649/99/$3.00

A Longitudinal  Study  of  the Relation  Between  Language  and

Theory-of-Mind  Development

Janet  Wilde  Astington  and Jennifer  M.  Jenkins

University  of  Toronto

Fifty-nine  3-year-olds  were tested  3 times over a period of 7 months in order to assess the  contribution
of  theory  of  mind  to language  development  and  of language  to theory-of-mind  development  (including
the  independent  contributions  of  syntax  and  semantics).  Language  competence  was  assessed  with  a
standardized  measure of reception  and production  of syntax and  semantics  (the Test of Early  Language
Development). Theory of mind was assessed with false-belief  tasks and appearance-reality  tasks. Earlier
language abilities predicted later theory-of-mind  test performance (controlling for earlier theory of mind),
but  earlier  theory  of  mind  did  not  predict  later  language  test  performance  (controlling  for  earlier
language). These  findings  are consistent  with  the  argument  that  language  is  fundamental  to  theory-of-
mind  development.

In this article we examine the relation between  theory-of-mind
development and language. It is noteworthy that the term theory of
mind  was  first  used  in  the  psychological  literature  in  an  article
attributing  theory  of  mind  to nonlinguistic  creatures  (Premack  &
Woodruff,  1978). Recently, however, there has been more  skepti-
cism regarding primates' possession of a theory of mind (Povinelli,
1999), to the point that some have expressed  the view that theory
of  mind  is  impossible  without  language  (Segal,  1998;  Smith,
1996). Even if there is evidence to support the argument that some
nonhuman primates have some ability to attribute mental states to
conspecifics  (Byrne  & Whiten,  1991), there  is general  agreement
that it is a very limited ability. In introducing Premack and Wood-
ruffs  term  to  the  developmental  literature,  Bretherton,  McNew,
and  Beeghly-Smith  (1981)  argued  that  theory  of  mind  is  first
evident in humans when language acquisition begins at the end of
the  1st year, in  shared reference  and joint  attention behaviors,  for
example. Certainly, the period from then until about 5 years of age
is the time during  which children's  theory  of  mind  develops, and
it  is  also  the  major  period  of  language  acquisition,  which  might
lead us to look for some relation between the two (Gopnik,  1990).
Theory of mind is a broad  term  (Astington,  1998) that  conveys
the idea of  understanding  social interaction  by attributing  beliefs,
desires,  intentions,  and  emotions  to people.  Our  focus  here  is  on
relations between theory of mind and language competence toward
the  end  of  the  preschool  period,  when  the  core  abilities  that  are
taken  to  indicate  the  possession  of  a  representational  theory  of
mind develop: that is, the ability to attribute false beliefs to the self

Janet Wilde Astington and Jennifer M. Jenkins, Institute of Child Study,
Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario,  Canada.

We  thank  the  Natural  Sciences  and  Engineering  Research  Council  of

Canada  for  support.

Correspondence  concerning  this  article  should  be  addressed  to  Janet
Wilde Astington, Institute  of Child  Study, Ontario Institute for  Studies in
Education, University of Toronto, 45 Walmer Road, Toronto, Ontario M5R
2X2,  Canada.  Electronic  mail  may  be  sent 
to  jwastington@oise.
utoronto.ca.

1311

and  others  and  the ability  to  distinguish  between  appearance  and
reality  (Gopnik  & Astington,  1988; Wimmer  & Perner,  1983).

We already know that there is a strong link between  false-belief
understanding and language ability. Jenkins and Astington (1996),
for  example,  found  high  correlations  between  3-  to  5-year-olds'
scores on standard false-belief  tests and various standard measures
of  general  language  ability,  r(66)  =  .61-.64,  such  as  the  Vocab-
ulary  and  Sentence  Memory  subtests  of  the  Stanford  Binet  Intel-
ligence  Scale  and  the  Test  of  Early  Language  Development
(Hresko,  Reid,  &  Hammill,  1981).  Recently,  numerous  studies
have  reported  correlations  between  theory-of-mind  task  perfor-
mance  and  language  competence  as  measured  with  a  variety  of
tasks  (e.g.,  Cutting  &  Dunn,  in  press;  Hughes  &  Dunn,  1997).
Further,  it  is  well  established  that  children  with  autism,  who
generally  fail  theory-of-mind  tasks, are delayed  in  their  language
achievements and have patterns of linguistic performance  different
from  those  of  nonautistic  children  (Tager-Flusberg,  1993). More-
over,  level  of  verbal  ability  is  a  crucial  factor  for  those  children
with  autism  who do pass false-belief  tasks  (Happe,  1995).

Thus,  there  is  certainly  some  relation  between  language  and
theory-of-mind  development.  However, 
this  does  not  say
much—or  rather,  it  says  it  at  too  broad  and  superficial  a  level.
Precision is needed about the nature of the relation and the aspects
of  language  that  are  involved.

What  Is  the  Nature  of  the  Relation  Between  Language

and  Theory-of-Mind  Development?

The correlations between  theory-of-mind  task performance  and
language ability can be explained in a number of ways. Logically,
when  A  correlates  with  B,  there  are  three  possibilities:  (1)  A
depends on B, (2) B depends on A,  and (3) both A and B depend on
some third factor  C. We briefly  discuss each of these possibilities,
focusing on the first one, which motivates the study we report here.

Theory of Mind  Depends  on Language

This explanation  has a weak version and a strong version. First,
in the weak  version,  it is argued  that  linguistic  ability  is  required

1312

ASTINGTON AND JENKINS

for  successful  performance  on  theory-of-mind  tasks.  Certainly,
current  theory-of-mind  assessment  methods  rely  heavily  on  lan-
guage. Frequently,  children  are told  a story or they have to  listen
while the experimenter talks about some task materials; they  have
to  comprehend  this  input,  process  the  experimenter's  questions
about it, and make some response. Even though the response itself
may  be nonverbal, in that the child  may point  to a location  when
asked,  for  example,  "Where  will  [the  story  character]  look?"  a
good  deal  of language processing  is required  in order  to respond.
Thus,  it  is  argued  that  3-year-old  children  do  understand  false
belief  but  that  because  of  the  linguistic  complexity  of  the  tasks,
they  are unable to demonstrate  their understanding  in the  context
of standard false-belief  tests (Chandler, Fritz, & Hala,  1989). This
version of the hypothesis does not speak to the question of whether
theory-of-mind  development  depends  on  language—just  to  the
limitations of current methods of testing for it—and argues that if
the  task  demands  less  linguistic  ability,  younger  children  will
perform correctly. For example, children can act out a doll's search
(when  the  doll  holds  a  false  belief)  better  than  they  can  make  a
verbal prediction  of where the doll will look  (Freeman, Lewis, &
Doherty,  1991).

However,  simplifying  the  language  of  the  task  is  one  thing;
omitting  language  altogether  is  something  else. Completely  non-
verbal  tasks  are  no  easier  (Call  &  Tomasello,  1999)  and  may
indeed  be  harder  (Plaut  & Karmiloff-Smith,  1993)  than  the  stan-
dard tasks. These findings from nonverbal tasks support the strong
version  of  the  first  hypothesis,  which  is  that  theory  of  mind
depends  on  language  such  that  linguistic  development  supports
theory-of-mind  development. From this point of view, it is not that
linguistic immaturity  masks children's underlying competence but
rather that theory-of-mind  development and language development
are  themselves  fundamentally  related  and  interdependent.  Lan-
guage  development  may  itself  provide  children  with  resources,
such  as  syntactic  ability  or  semantic  understanding,  that  promote
or allow  false-belief  understanding.

At the present time there is no evidence that children understand
belief  representation  before  they  have  the  linguistic  means  to
express their understanding. Povinelli and deBlois (1992) gave 3-
and 4-year-old children a nonverbal task that had been used to test
chimpanzees'  understanding of the link between seeing and know-
ing. In general,  3-year-olds  failed  the test and 4-year-olds  passed;
moreover,  and importantly,  those who passed could  give a  verbal
explanation  of  the  link  between  seeing  and  knowing,  and  those
who failed  could  not.

A causal  link from  language  to theory-of-mind  development  is
also suggested  by  studies of  deaf  children  whose language devel-
opment is delayed although their nonverbal intelligence and social
adjustment  are  within  normal  levels.  When  these  children  are
tested  on  standard  false-belief  tasks  adapted  to  their  mode  of
communication, they frequently  fail the tasks although  responding
correctly  to  control  questions  (Gale,  de  Villiers,  de  Villiers,  &
Pyers,  1996; Peterson & Siegal,  1995). More strikingly, Gale et al.
showed that such children also had difficulty  with nonverbal tasks,
such as the one developed by Povinelli and deBlois (1992). More-
over, the children's performance on this task was predicted by their
level  of  language  development.  These  findings  support  the  idea
that language development precedes and promotes  theory-of-mind
development.

Language  Depends  on  Theory of Mind

The second hypothesis proposes that the relation operates in the
other direction, from  theory of mind to language. This argument is
consonant  with  Piaget's  (1954,  1980) view  that  thought  precedes
language,  a  view  that  underlies  much  of  cognitive  development
research. According  to this view, theory of mind is not  dependent
on linguistic representation; rather, children first acquire a concep-
tual understanding  of false  belief  and appearance-reality  and then
language becomes elaborated  to reflect  this development. Such an
argument  is  consistent  with  the  proposal  that  false-belief  under-
standing  is  dependent  on  innate  modular  systems  (Baron-Cohen,
1995;  Leslie  &  Roth,  1993).  It  is  also  consistent  with  Perner's
(1991)  proposal  that  the  child  uses  mental  models  to  represent
false  beliefs.  The  fact  that  an  adult  who  loses  the  capacity  for
language does not lose the ability  to understand  false  belief  (Var-
ley,  1998)  supports  the  argument  that  theory  of  mind  is  not
dependent  on language. However,  it may  still be the case that the
development  of  a theory  of mind  is facilitated  by  language.

Theory of Mind  and Language  Both  Depend  on
Some  Other Factor

The third  hypothesis  is that language  and theory-of-mind  mea-
sures  correlate  because  they  are  both  dependent  on  some  other
factor; that is, some underlying factor brings about development in
both theory  of mind and language. According  to some views, this
factor  is  internal,  such  as  developments  in  working  memory  or
executive  function,  which  allow  children  to  reason  using  more
complex  embedded  rules  that  are  then  exploited  in  both  theory-
of-mind  and language tasks (Zelazo & Jacques,  1996). According
to  other  views,  this  factor  is  external  and  involves  the  child's
increasingly  sophisticated  participation  in  social  and  cultural  ac-
tivities  (Dunn,  1988; Nelson,  1996). A version  of this  hypothesis
argues  that  theory  of  mind  and  language  development  are  inter-
twined, each promoting  development  of the other via a bootstrap-
ping mechanism  (Shatz,  1994).

In summary, the possibilities are these: Theory of mind depends
on  language;  or  language  depends  on  theory  of  mind;  or  both
depend  on  a  third  factor.  Whatever  the  direction  of  the  relation,
one must  also consider  what  aspects  of  language  are  involved.

What  Aspects  of  Language  Are  Related  to

Theory-of-Mind  Development?

Pragmatic, semantic, and syntactic aspects of language develop
together and are strongly related in normal development. Although
it  is  likely  that  all  three  are  related  to  theory  of  mind,  it  is  also
likely that each plays a different  role. Moreover, it may be  specific
features  of  pragmatics,  semantics,  and  syntax  that  are the  impor-
tant factors. We briefly  summarize the possibilities here, although
in  the  study  reported  below  we  assess only  the general effects  of
semantic  and  syntactic  development.

Pragmatic  ability  underlies  the  ability  to use  and  interpret  lan-
guage appropriately in social situations, which depends on keeping
track  of  listeners'  and  speakers'  beliefs  and  intentions.  Thus,
pragmatics  and  theory  of  mind  are  related  by  definition,  and
indeed,  scores  on  a  test  of  pragmatic  ability  were  found  to  be
related  to  false-belief  task  performance  in  a  sample  of  children

LANGUAGE  AND THEORY  OF MIND

1313

with autism (Eisenmajer  & Prior,  1991). In addition, Frith, Happe,
and  Siddons  (1994)  included  items  requiring  pragmatic  skill  in
their measure of real-life social adaptation, which they found  to be
associated  with  false-belief  task  performance  in  a  group  of  chil-
dren  with autism, although  not in comparison  groups  of  normally
developing  children  and  learning-disabled  children.  The  relation
between  theory  of  mind  and  more  specific  features  of  pragmatic
development,  such  as  the  appropriate  use  of  referential  devices,
can  be  seen  in  an  examination  of  relations  between  narrative
production  and  false-belief  understanding  (Charman  &  Shmueli-
Goetz,  1998).

Semantics is concerned  with word meaning. At a general level,
semantic  ability facilitates  children's  participation  in verbal  social
interaction,  which  some  would  argue  is  important  to  theory-of-
mind development (Dunn,  1988; Nelson,  1996). More  specifically,
Olson  (1988)  argued  that  theory-of-mind  development  is  depen-
dent on the acquisition of particular terms, such as think, know, and
remember, that  are used  to refer  to  mental  states.  Such  states  are
unobservable,  although  their  effects  can  be  felt  in  the  self  and
observed in others. These unobservable phenomena are brought to
the child's attention when they are referred to with linguistic terms.
The same linguistic terms are applied to the child's own states and
to  those  of  other  people,  which  allows  children  to  map  their
subjective feelings onto other people's experiences and develop an
understanding  of these states. In support of this argument, Moore,
Pure,  and  Furrow  (1990)  showed  that  there  is  a relation  between
children's  comprehension  of  words  such  as  think  and  know  and
their  performance  on  tests  of  false-belief  understanding.

Syntactic  ability  is the ability  to combine words into sentences.
At a general level, one could  argue that  syntactic  abilities  support
reasoning  about  false  beliefs  by  facilitating  the  representation  of
states  different  from  current  reality  (Plaut  &  Karmiloff-Smith,
1993).  More  specifically,  mental-state  reports  require  complex
constructions  consisting  of a main sentence with another  sentence
embedded  in  it: for  example,  "John  thinks  the chocolate  is in  the
cupboard." The embedded  sentence, "the  chocolate  is  in the cup-
board,"  forms  a  subordinate  clause  that  acts  as  the  grammatical
object  of  the  verb  "thinks"  in  the  main  sentence.  In  linguistics,
such clauses are called object complements. Their importance here
is  that  they  allow  the  report  of  false  beliefs;  that  is,  the  whole
construction  may  be  true  even  though  the  embedded  sentence  is
false. Thus, one can truthfully  say, "John thinks the chocolate is in
the cupboard"  even  if  it  is  actually  in  the drawer  and  one  knows
that. During  the preschool  years, children  achieve  mastery  of  the
basic syntactic forms  of their language, which in English  includes
mastery  of  these  object  complements.  De  Villiers  (1995)  argued
that  it  is  acquisition  of  the  syntax  of  complementation  that  pro-
vides  the  representational  format  needed  for  false-belief  under-
standing.  Relations  do  exist  between  theory-of-mind  tasks  and
syntactic  tasks  that  use  complement-taking  verbs,  but  from  the
available  data  one  cannot  determine  the  direction  of  the  relation
(Tager-Flusberg,  1997).

In the study reported here we investigated  the relation  between
language  and theory  of mind  over time. We had two goals: (a) to
investigate  the  direction  of  the  relation  between  language  and
theory  of mind  and (b) to investigate the separate contributions of
semantic  and syntactic  abilities to this relation. We assessed  gen-
eral  semantic  and  syntactic  development,  not  the  specific  under-
standing of mental terms and object complements. Our view is that

general language ability plays an important role in  theory-of-mind
development.  We  expected  that  changes  in  children's  theory  of
mind  would  be  predicted  by  their  linguistic  competence,  not  the
reverse.  We  assessed  both  theory-of-mind  task  performance  and
level of language development in a sample of middle-class  3-year-
olds  at  three  points  in  time  over  a  period  of  7  months.  We
hypothesized  that  language  test  scores  at  an  earlier  time  point
would  predict changes  in theory-of-mind  test  scores between  that
time  and  a later time point, whereas theory-of-mind  test scores at
an  earlier  time  point  would  not  predict  changes  in  language  test
scores  between  the  earlier  and  later  time  points.  We  also  deter-
mined  whether  syntactic  or  semantic  competence  was  more  im-
portant in the relation of language to theory-of-mind  development.

Method

Participants

Three  cohorts  of  children  entering  the  nursery  class  of  a  university
laboratory  school  were  tested  in  three  separate  years.  There  were  59
children  altogether,  29 girls and  30 boys. Their mean  age at the first time
of testing  was 3 years 4 months  (range  =  2 years 9 months to 3 years  10
months).  They  were  all  from  middle-class  English-speaking  homes.  Four
children  spoke another  language  at home in addition  to English, but  their
English-language  competence  was  sufficient  for  them  to participate  com-
fortably  in  the  testing.  Two  other  children,  1 who  did  not  speak  English
and  1 who  was  shy, did  not participate  in the  testing.

Materials

Theory of mind.  Different  materials1 were used for the  theory-of-mind
tasks  at  the  three  time  points.  There  were  three  familiar  boxes  with
unexpected  contents:  a  crayon  box  containing  a  doll,  a  milk  carton  con-
taining elastics, and a juice box containing ribbons. There were also three
familiar  boxes with their usual contents, which  were switched  with some-
thing  else  during  the  test:  a bandaid  box  and  pennies,  a kleenex  box  and
book,  a raisin  box and  stickers. There  were  three objects  that  looked  like
one thing but were really something else: a sponge that looked like a rock,
a  pen  that  looked  like  a  toy  snake,  and  candies  that  looked  like  stones.
Dolls  and  doll-size  equipment  (boxes,  baskets,  desk,  cupboard,  ball,  and
candy) were used to act out the stories in the change-in-location  false-belief
task.

Language.  The  Test  of  Early  Language  Development  (Hresko  et  al.,
1981)  was  used  to  assess  language  ability.  This  test  measures  general
language ability by assessing syntactic and semantic skills, in both expres-
sive and receptive forms, through responses to questions  and pictures  (see
examples  in  the  Appendix).  The  test  manual  designates  each  individual
item  as belonging  to  the  syntax  or  semantics  and  expressive  or  receptive
categories. The number of items representing each construct varies because
the  selection  of  test  items  from  a  large  pool  of  items  was  determined
empirically based on item difficulty  and discriminating power. The test has
been  standardized  on  children  between  3  and  7  years  of  age,  and  good
test-retest  reliability  (a  =  .90)  and  internal  consistency  (a  =  .90)  have
been  established.  It  has  been  found  to  be  highly  correlated  with  the
Sentence Memory subtest of the Stanford Binet Intelligence Scale, r(66)  =
.76 (Jenkins  & Astington,  1996).

'It  was  not  possible  to  use  the  same  materials  at  subsequent  test  times
because the children would no longer have entertained an initial false belief
about  the  materials,  which  is  an  essential  feature  of  unexpected-contents
false-belief  tasks and  appearance-reality  tasks.

1314

Procedure

ASTINGTON  AND  JENKINS

Scoring

Children were tested near the beginning, middle, and end of their nursery

school  year at approximately  3.5-month  intervals.

Theory  of mind.  At each  time  of testing,  children  were  given  three

tasks:

1.  A standard  change-in-location  false-belief  task  acted  out with dolls:
A doll leaves an object in one place, and while the doll is away, the object
is moved to a new place. Then the doll returns and the child is asked where
the doll will look for the object. Control questions were asked to ensure that
the child remembered  where the doll had left  the object  and that the child
knew  where it really  was later on. A different  story,  with  different  dolls,
objects, and locations, was used at each  time  point.

2.  A  standard  unexpected-contents  false-belief  task:  Children  were
asked  what  was inside a familiar  box, and they  answered  with  the usual
contents.  Then  the  box  was  opened  and  was  found  to  have  unusual
contents.  After  these  unexpected  contents  were  replaced  in the box,  the
children  were again asked what was inside the box. Then they were asked
what  they  had thought  was inside it before  it was opened  and what  their
friend,  who had not seen  inside the box, would  think  was  inside it before
it was opened. A different  box and contents were used at each time point.
3.  A standard  appearance-reality  task:  Children  were shown  an object
that  looked  like  one thing  and was really  something  else  (e.g.,  a sponge
painted to look like a rock). They  were asked what the object  looked like,
what it really was, what their friend  would think it was when he or she first
saw  it, and what  they  thought  it was when  they  first  saw it. A  different
object  was used at each  time  point.

If  any of the theory-of-mind  test questions  was not answered  spontane-
ously,  the child  was given  a forced-choice  alternative.  The order  of the
three  tasks  and the order  of questions  within  tasks  were  counterbalanced
across children. At the end of the test session at each time point, children
were  asked  what  was inside  another  box (that  did in fact  have  the usual
contents). We included  this  item so that the children  would not think  that
every box we showed  them had unusual  contents.

Language.  At each time of testing, the children were given the Test of
Early Language Development (Hresko et al., 1981). Its test battery consists
of  38 items  ordered  by difficulty  level  (with  recommendations  for entry
points based  on age). In this  study, at Time  1 all children  began  with the
first  item  and continued  until  they  had failed  five  consecutive  items (the
recommended  ceiling).  At Time  2 the test  began  from  the child's  first
failure at Time  1 and continued until the point of five consecutive  failures.
Similarly,  the Time  3  test  began  from  the  first  failure  at  Time  2 and
continued  until  the point  of  five  consecutive  failures.  We followed  this
procedure  to reduce  fatigue  and frustration.  If  we had gone  back  to the
beginning at each time of testing, a child with a high score might have been
fatigued  by the need to respond  to many  items. As it was, sometimes the
first  failed  item was some way below the five consecutive  failures, and so
the child repeated a fair  number of items passed at the previous test  point.
Further,  if  we had continued  beyond  five  consecutive  failures,  children
might  have  been  frustrated  by items  that  were too difficult  for them.

false-belief 

from 

Theory of mind.  At each  test  time, the child  was asked six test ques-
tions on the theory-of-mind  tasks; this yielded six points that were summed
to give a total theory-of-mind  score (range =  0-6). Control questions had
to be answered  correctly for credit to be given.  One point  came from the
change-in-location 
the
unexpected-contents  false-belief  task, for answers  to the questions  about
the  friend's  and the child's  own  false  belief. Three points came from the
appearance-reality  task, two for answers  concerning  the friend's  and  the
child's  own  false  belief  and one for distinguishing  appearance and reality
(both  of these questions had to be answered  correctly  for this point to be
counted).  The  internal  consistency  (a)  of  the  theory-of-mind  measure
was 0.59 at Time  1, 0.59 at Time 2, and 0.80 at Time 3.

task.  Two  points  came 

Language.  The  child's  raw  score  on  the  Test  of  Early  Language
Development  was used  as a measure  of general  language  competence at
each  time point. This  score is the sum  total of all items passed,  including
credit for those passed at an earlier time. All items at and above the ceiling
were recorded as failures. In addition, subscores were computed  separately
for the syntactic and semantic items; one item, designed to detect problems
in  articulation,  was not included  in either  subscore. The internal  consis-
tencies  (a) for syntax  and semantics, respectively,  were 0.67 and 0.86 at
Time  1, 0.70 and 0.87 at Time 2, and 0.73 and 0.84 at Time 3.

Results

All  but  1  of  the  children  who  correctly  answered  the  test
question  in  the  change-in-location  false-belief  task  correctly  an-
swered  the  control  questions.  The  1 child,  who  failed  a  control
question at Time 2, was scored as incorrect on the test question  for
that time point. All children correctly remembered  the unexpected
contents  of  the  box  before  they  were  asked  about  their  previous
belief  and their friend's  false  belief  about its contents. At Time 2,
1 child was not asked the questions for this item; she was given the
group  mean  for  these  two  scores.  Table  1 shows  the  means  and
standard  deviations  for  all  scores  at  each  time  point.  Language
competence  increased  steadily  across  the  three  time  points.
Theory-of-mind  performance  increased  between  Times  1  and  2
and  then  leveled  off.

Table 2 shows the Pearson product-moment  correlations  among
age,  theory  of  mind,  and  language  at  and  across  the  three  time
points.  As  anticipated,  theory  of  mind  and language  were  associ-
ated  with  each  other  and  with  age  (Happe,  1995;  Jenkins  &
Astington,  1996).  The  correlations  among  the  theory-of-mind
scores  and  among  the  language  scores  show  the  stability  of  chil-
dren's relative performance  over time. The correlations  of  theory-
of-mind  scores  with  each  other  and  with  language,  although  not

Table  1
Mean  Scores  and  Standard  Deviations  at  Three  Time Points  (N  =  59)

Time

1

Time

2

Time

3

Variable

Age (in months)
Theory of mind
Language  test  total  score

Syntax  subtotal
Semantics  subtotal

M

40.1
2.2
12.0
3.7
7.4

SD

3.8
1.6
6.0
1.9
4.2

M

43.6
3.5
15.8
4.7
10.2

SD

3.8
1.6
6.3
2.0
4.6

M

47.1
3.5
21.1
6.6
13.5

SD

3.8
2.1
5.6
1.9
4.0

Range  over
three  time

points

33-53
0-6
2-29
0-10
1-20

LANGUAGE  AND  THEORY  OF  MIND

1315

Table  2
Pearson  Correlations of Age,  Theory of Mind, and Language  at and  Across
Three Time Points  (N  =  59)

Variable

1. Age
2. Theory  of  mind,  Time  1
3. Theory  of  mind,  Time  2
4. Theory  of  mind,  Time  3
5. Language,  Time  1
6. Language,  Time  2
7. Language,  Time  3

1

—

.36**
.15
.40**
.36**
.40**
.30*

"p<.05. 

**/><  .01.  * * * / ; < . 0 0 1.

—

.52***
43***
.16
.28*
.15

.65***
.38**
.47***
.35**

.50***
.52***
44***

.84***
.73***

.82*** 

—

significant  at  every  time  point,  were  always  in  the  expected
direction.

Our  main concern  is  with  the relation  between  theory  of  mind
and  language  over  time.  If  the  development  of  a  theory  of  mind
boosts  linguistic  development,  we  would  expect  that  theory  of
mind  at an  earlier  time point  would predict  language later.  If,  on
the other hand, language plays an important role in  theory-of-mind
development,  we  would  expect  the  reverse  pattern,  that  is,  lan-
guage  at  an  earlier  time  point  would  predict  the  theory-of-mind
scores  later  on.  To  assess  these  two  alternatives,  we  used  hierar-
chical  regression  to  establish,  first,  the  unique  contribution  of
theory  of  mind  to  language  development  and,  second, the  unique
contribution  of  language  to theory-of-mind  development.

Children's  performance  on  the  theory-of-mind  tasks  at  a  later
time point will depend partly on their age and their earlier  perfor-
mance on the theory-of-mind  tasks. Thus, variability in  children's
scores that was due to these two factors  was accounted for first  in
the analyses, and then the contribution of earlier language compe-
tence was assessed. Similarly, language test performance  at a later
time will be determined  partly by  age and by  earlier  performance
on the language  test, and so again, variability  in children's  scores
that  was  due  to  these  two  factors  was  accounted  for  first  in  the
analyses,  and  then  the  contribution  of  the  earlier  theory-of-mind
performance  was assessed. This strategy  allowed us to predict the
contribution  of  language  to  change  in  theory-of-mind  test  scores
and the contribution  of  theory  of mind  to change in language  test
scores. In this way we could determine whether language played a
role  in  theory-of-mind  development  and  whether  theory  of  mind
played  a role  in  language  development.

Predicting  Language  From  Theory of Mind

The first  three  analyses  assessed  the contribution  of  theory-of-
mind  scores  at one point  in time  to variability  in language  scores
at a later time point, that is, from  Time  1 to Time 2, from  Time 2
to Time  3, and from  Time  1 to Time 3. Table 3 shows the results
of these analyses; the regression coefficients  shown are those at the
final  step.  First,  for  predicting  language  at  Time  2,  after  Step  1
with  age  and  language  at Time  1 in  the equation, R2  =  .71, F(2,
56)  =  68.61, p  <  .001. After  the  addition  of  theory  of  mind  at
Time  1, A/?2 =  .01, Finc(l,  55)  =  2.89, ns. That is, the addition of
theory of mind did not reliably improve R2.  Second, for predicting
language at Time 3, after  Step  1 with age and language at Time 2
in the equation, R2  =  .67, F(2, 56)  =  57.18, p  <  .001. After  the

addition  of  theory  of  mind  at  Time  2,  AR2  < 
.01,  Finc(l,
55)  =  0.28, ns. That  is, again, the addition  of theory  of  mind  did
not reliably improve R2. Likewise, third, for predicting language at
Time 3 from the Time  1 scores, after Step  1  with age and language
at Time  1 in the equation, R2  =  .53, F(2, 56)  =  32.17, p  < .001.
After  the addition of theory of mind at Time  1, A/?2 <  .01,  Finc(l,
55)  =  0.07, ns. That is, once again, the addition of theory of mind
did  not  reliably  improve  R2.  Thus,  there  is  no  indication  that
theory-of-mind  task  performance  at  an  earlier  point  in  time pre-
dicts language test performance  later on.

Predicting  Theory of Mind  From  Language

We performed  a similar set of analyses to assess the contribution
of language scores at one point in time to variability in  theory-of-

Table  3
Summary  of Hierarchical  Regression Analyses  Predicting
Language  From  Theory of Mind  (N  =  59)

Variable

B

SEB

13

Time  1 to  Time

T

Step  1
Age
Language,  Time

1

Step  2

Theory  of  mind,

Time

1 

.12
.83

.50

.13
.08

.29

Time  2 to  Time

3b

Step  1
Age
Language,  Time

Step  2

2

Theory  of  mind,

Time

2 

-.06
.77

-.16

Time  1 to  Time

Step 1
Age
Language,  Time

Step  2

1

Theory  of  mind,

Time

1 

.05
.67

.09

.12
.08

.30
3b

.15
.09

.34

.07
.79

.13

-.04
.86

-.05

.03
.71

.03

R1

or  AS2

.71***

.01

.67***

.002

.53***

.0006

a Dependent  variable  =  language,  Time  2.  ""Dependent  variable  =  lan-
guage,  Time  3.
* * * p<  .001.

1316

ASTINGTON AND JENKINS

Table 4
Summary  of Hierarchical  Regression Analyses  Predicting
Theory of Mind  From  Language  (TV =  59)

Variable

B

SEB

P

Time  1 to Time

2a

R2
OTAR2

Step 1
Age
Theory of mind,

Step 2

Time

1 

Language, Time

1

-.07
.52

.10

Time 2 to Time

Step 1
Age
Theory of mind,

Step 2

Time

2 

Language, Time

2

.14
.68

.06

Time  1 to Time

Step 1
Age
Theory of mind,

Step 2

Language, Time

Time

1 

1

.07
.41

.14

.05
.11

.03
3b

.06
.13

.04
3b

.07
.15

.04

-.17
.52

.27***

.35

.11**

.25
.53

.17

.14
.32

.39

.51***

.02

.26***

.13***

aDependent variable  =  theory of mind, Time 2. 
theory of mind, Time 3.
**P<m. 

***/>< .ooi.

bDependent variable  =

mind  scores  at a later  time point:  again,  from  Time  1 to Time 2,
from Time 2 to Time 3, and from Time  1 to Time 3. Table 4 shows
the results of these analyses; the regression coefficients  shown are
those  at  the  final  step.  First,  for  predicting  theory  of  mind  at
Time 2, after  Step  1 with age and theory of mind at Time  1 in the
equation, R2  =  .27, F(2, 56) =  10.44, p  <  .001. After the addition
of  language  at Time  1, AR2  =  .11, Finc(l,  55)  =  9.77, p  < .01.
That is, the addition of language reliably improved R2. Second, for
predicting  theory  of  mind  at  Time  3, after  Step  1 with  age and
theory  of  mind  at  Time  2  in  the  equation,  R2  =  .51, F(2,
56)  =  29.36, p  <  .001. After  the addition of language at Time 2,
AR2  =  .02, Finc(l,  55) =  2.24, ns. Here, the addition of language
did not reliably  improve R2. However, third, for predicting  theory
of  mind  at Time 3 from  the Time  1 scores, after  Step  1 with age
and  theory  of  mind  at  Time  1 in  the  equation,  R2  =  .26, F(2,
56)  =  9.68, p  <  .001. After  the addition  of language  at Time  1,
AR2  =  .13, Finc(l, 55) =  12.02, p  <  .001. That is, the addition of
language reliably  improved R2. Thus, language at an earlier  point
in  time predicted  theory  of mind later on, at least  from  Time  1  to
Time 2 and from Time  1 to Time 3. As mentioned,  theory-of-mind
task  performance  appeared  steady  between  Time 2 and Time 3.

Testing the Relative Importance  of Syntax and Semantics

A subject of lively debate in this area concerns what aspects of
language might be important for theory-of-mind  development. To
address this issue, we used the syntax and semantics subscores as
separate variables in the regression models. In the analyses  shown
in  Table 4, the total  language  score was added  at Step 2. To test
whether  syntax,  semantics,  or both  make  independent  contribu-

tions to the prediction of theory of mind, instead of adding the sum
total score in one step we added the syntax subscore at Step 2 and
the  semantics  subscore  at Step  3 in one model,  and we reversed
this order in another model, adding semantics at Step 2 and syntax
at  Step  3. Table  5  shows  the results  using  this  approach  for the
prediction  from  Time  1 to  Time  2  (the  regression  coefficients
given  are for  the  final  step  in  each  model).  Theory  of  mind  at
Time 2 is the dependent  variable, and as before,  after  Step  1 with
age and theory of mind at Time  1 in the equation, R2  =  .27, F(2,
56)  =  10.44, p  <  .001. In the first model  (Model  a), the Time 1
semantics score is added at Step 2: AR2  = .08, Finc(l, 55) = 7.05,
p <  .05. Then the Time  1 syntax score is added at Step 3: AR2  =
.10, Finc(l, 54) =  9.36, p <  .01. Thus syntax made an independent
contribution  to  the prediction  of  theory  of  mind  after  semantics
was  entered.  In the second  model  (Model  b), the Time  1 syntax
score is added at Step 2: AR2 = .17, Finc(l, 55) =  16.84,p < .001.
Then the Time  1 semantics  score is added  at Step 3: AR2  = .01,
Finc(l,  54)  =  0.73, ns. Here,  semantics  made no additional con-
tribution  to  the  prediction  of  theory  of  mind  after  syntax  was
entered.

A  similar  result  was  found  when  predicting  from  Time  1 to
Time 3. After  Step  1 with age and theory of mind at Time  1 in the
equation, R2  = .26, F(2, 56) =  9.68, p  <  .001. In the first model,
after  semantics  at Time  1 is added  at Step  2, AR2  =  .11, Finc(l,
55) =  9.38, p <  .01, and after  syntax at Time  1 is added at Step 3,
AR2  =  .05, Finc(l, 54) =  4.87, p <  .05. In the second model,  after
syntax  at  Time  1  is  added  at  Step  2,  AR2  =  .16,  Finc(l,
55)  =  15.18, p  <  .001, and after  semantics  at Time  1 is added at
Step 3, AR2  <  .001, Finc(l,  54) <  .001, ns. That is, again, syntax
made  an independent  contribution  to the prediction  of  theory of
mind  after  semantics  was entered,  but  semantics  made  no addi-
tional  contribution  after  syntax  was entered.  Recall  that  language
at Time 2 made no contribution to the prediction of Time 3 theory
of mind after age and theory of mind at Time 2 were controlled for,

Table 5
Summary of Hierarchical Regression Analyses  Predicting
Theory-of-Mind Scores at Time 2 From  Semantics
and Syntax at Time  1 (N = 59)

Variable

B

SEB

P

R2

or A/?2

Step 1
Age
Theory of mind, Time

1 

Step 2

Step 3

Semantics, Time 1

Syntax, Time 1

Step 2

Step 3

Syntax, Time 1

Semantics, Time 1

Both models

-.08
.53

Model a

-.06

.49

Model b

.49

-.06

.05
.11

.07

.16

.16

.07

-.18
.53

27***

-.16

.08*

.57

.10**

.57

.17***

-.16

.01

* p < . 0 5.  * * / > <. 01.

***p  < .001.

LANGUAGE  AND THEORY  OF MIND

1317

and  as expected,  the  same result  was found  when  the syntax  and
semantics  scores  were entered  separately.

It  is  important  to  note  that  although  the  syntax  and  semantics
subscores  were highly  correlated,  as  one  would  expect—Time  1,
K57)  =  .84; Time  2,  r(57)  =  .79; Time  3,  r(57)  =  .76—syntax
still made an independent contribution  to the prediction of change
in the theory-of-mind  scores, and this contribution  was not due to
outliers or other unusual features  of the data. We should  also note
that  it  was  only  the  syntax  subscore  that  acted  in  this  way.  We
created  subscores  for  expressive  and  receptive  items  and  used
them as separate variables in the regression  models just as we did
for  syntax  and  semantics.  In  these  analyses  the  variable  entered
first,  whether  expressive  or  receptive,  accounted  for  all  of  the
variance due to language, and no further contribution was made by
the  variable  entered  second.

Psychometric  Issues

The  results  of  this  study  show  that  language  competence  pre-
dicts  theory-of-mind  development  but  that  the reverse  is  not  the
case  (theory-of-mind  abilities  do  not predict  language  change). It
is  important  to  consider  the  possibility  that  these  results  may  be
explained, at least in part, by psychometric differences  between the
language and theory-of-mind  measures. The range and variance of
the  language  test  scores  are  greater  than  those  of  the  theory-of-
mind test scores (see Table  1), and the language test scores have a
higher  internal  consistency.  Indeed,  the  Test  of  Early  Language
Development  is  a  standardized  measure  that  meets  the  standards
for  educational  and psychological  tests established  by the  Ameri-
can  Psychological  Association  (Hresko  et  al.,  1981,  p.  6).  In
contrast,  although  theory-of-mind  researchers  may  refer  to  "stan-
dard" false-belief  tests, there is no standardized measure  available
at  the  present  time  (Mayes,  Klin,  Tercyak,  Cicchetti,  &  Cohen,
1996). We used tasks  that  are commonly  reported  in the research
literature  to  assess  the  development  of  theory  of  mind  in  the
preschool years. At each time point the measure yields  satisfactory
internal  consistency  (see  Scoring  in  the  Method  section),  and
scores  on  the measure  are correlated  across  the three  time  points
(p  <  .001, see Table 2),  although the correlations are not as high
as for the language measures. One factor contributing to this lower
level  of  test-retest  reliability  is  the  fact  that  although  we  used
similar  materials  and  identical  question  structures,  we  could  not
use exactly  the same materials across time points because the box
with  unexpected  contents  and  the  appearance-reality  item  would
not have provoked a false belief when viewed a second time. Note
that R2  is higher after  the first  step in each of the three regressions
predicting  language  from  theory  of  mind  than  it  is  in  the  corre-
sponding  three  regressions  predicting  theory  of  mind  from  lan-
guage (see Tables 3 and 4). That is, earlier language scores account
for  more  of  the  variance  in  later  language  scores  than  earlier
theory-of-mind  scores  account  for  in  later  theory-of-mind  scores.
Thus,  there  is  a  smaller  proportion  of  the  variance  left  to  be
accounted  for  on  the second  step when  predicting  language  from
theory  of  mind  than  when  predicting  theory  of  mind  from  lan-
guage. One might say that the playing field is tilted in favor  of the
results  obtained.

We  cannot,  post  hoc,  improve  the  reliability  of  the  theory-of-
mind measure, but in  an attempt  to level the playing field  we can
manipulate the language test scores to make them more compara-

ble to the theory-of-mind  test  scores. For example, if  scores  from
the  Test  of  Early  Language  Development  are  collapsed  to  quar-
tiles,  the  range  and  variance  of  the  language  scores  are  reduced.
Nonetheless,  the same result  is  found:  That  is, at  Step  2, Time  1
language  predicts  13%  (p  <  .01)  of  the  variance  in  Time  2
theory-of-mind  scores,  whereas  Time  1 theory  of  mind  predicts
less than 1% (ns) of the variance in Time 2 language. Similarly, for
Time  1 to Time 3, at Step 2, Time  1 language predicts  16% (p  <
.001)  of  the  variance  in  Time  3  theory-of-mind  scores,  whereas
Time  1 theory  of  mind predicts  less than  1% (ns)  of the  variance
in Time  3 language. However,  in these analyses  it is still  the case
that  R2  is  higher  after  the  first  step  in  the  regressions  predicting
language  from  theory  of  mind  than  it  is  in  the  corresponding
regressions predicting theory of mind from language. That is, there
is still  a tilt to the playing  field.

In  an  attempt  to  level  it  further,  we  can  create  language  test
scores that are more comparable to the theory-of-mind  test  scores
by  arbitrarily  selecting  six test items. Admittedly,  each of the test
items  was  originally  selected  on  the  basis  of  its  discriminating
power—that  is, the individual items correlate highly with the total
score  of  the  test—but  nonetheless,  the  arbitrary  scores  are  more
comparable  to  the  theory-of-mind  scores.  In  order  to  cover  the
range of development  while excluding  items that all children  pass
or fail  at all three  time points, we  selected  Item  3 and then  every
sixth item up to Item 33; this selection  included  three  syntax  and
three semantic items. The arbitrary scores so created have a range,
variance,  and  internal  consistency  similar  to  those  of  the  theory-
of-mind  scores  (Time  1, M  =  2.0,  SD  =  1.2,  a  =  .53; Time  2,
M  =  2.8, SD  =  1.2,  a  =  .61;  Time  3, M  =  3.6, SD  =  1.1, a  =
.48; cf.  Table  1  and Scoring in the Method section). If the analyses
are rerun  using  these  scores, the same  result  is  found:  That  is, at
Step 2, Time  1 language predicts  17% (p  <  .001)  of the variance
in Time 2 theory-of-mind  scores, whereas Time  1 theory  of  mind
predicts  only  2% (ns)  of  the  variance  in  Time  2 language.  Simi-
larly,  for  Time  1 to Time  3, at Step  2, Time  1 language  predicts
12%  (p  <  .01)  of  the variance  in Time  3 theory-of-mind  scores,
whereas Time  1 theory  of  mind  predicts less than  1% (ns)  of  the
variance  in  Time  3 language.  Moreover,  R2  after  the  first  step  is
lower in the regressions  predicting  language from  theory  of  mind
than in the original analyses (Time  1 to Time 2, R2  =  .51; Time 2
to Time  3, R2  =  .50; Time  1 to Time  3, R2  =  .18; cf.  Table 3).
We  conclude  that  although  the  results  reported  above  may  be
partly  due to psychometric  differences  between  the language  and
theory-of-mind  measures,  they  are consistent  with  our  claim  that
language  competence  predicts  theory-of-mind  development.  Fur-
ther, the weight  of  this prediction  is carried by  syntactic  abilities.

Discussion

It is no surprise to find a relation between language competence
and  theory  of  mind.  What  is  new  in  this  article  is  the  evidence
provided regarding the direction of the relation between them. We
found  that changes in children's  theory of mind were predicted by
their  language  competence  but  that  there  was  no  reciprocal  rela-
tion; that  is, language  development  was  not predicted  by  theory-
of-mind test scores. It is important to note that the  theory-of-mind
tasks that we used are verbal tests requiring some linguistic ability
on the part of the child. Thus, our findings  are consistent with the
hypothesis that  linguistic  ability  is required for  successful  perfor-

1318

ASTINGTON  AND  JENKINS

mance  on  theory-of-mind  tasks.  We  chose  to  use  these  tests  be-
cause they are "standard" in the literature; that is, they are the tests
that  over  the  past  15  years  have  provided  a  mass  of  data  on
children's  theory-of-mind  development.  Because  they  are  verbal
tests,  successful  performance  will  require  a  certain  level  of  lin-
guistic  skill,  which  explains,  at  least  in  part,  the  finding  that
theory-of-mind  and  language  measures  are  correlated  in  many
studies. However,  we argue  for  the strong  version  of  the hypoth-
esis  that  theory  of  mind  depends  on  language.  Although  not
conclusive,  these  data  are  consistent  with  the  hypothesis  that
linguistic  development  promotes  theory-of-mind  development.
Further, our results suggest that it is syntax—that  is, the  structural
features  of language—that is of particular importance. Why might
this  be  so?  Why  is  syntax  instrumental  in  promoting  a  represen-
tational  understanding  of  mind?

The  core  abilities  that  are  taken  to  indicate  possession  of  a
representational  theory  of mind  and that we assessed in this study
are the ability to attribute false beliefs to the self and others and the
ability  to distinguish  between  appearance  and reality. These  abil-
ities are metarepresentational (Perner, 1991) in that they depend on
the child's  understanding  that people represent  the world  in  mind
and  act on the basis of their representation  even in  cases where it
misrepresents the actual situation. This understanding is critical to
successful  performance  on false-belief  tasks. In order to represent
misrepresentation,  the child  has to distinguish between  the  world
and the mind and recognize that there is a mismatch between what
is  out  there  in  the  world  and  what  is  represented  in  someone's
mind. In false-belief  tasks, the "world" is what the child sees in the
visual array—for example, the dolls and toy objects in the change-
in-location task. As the story unfolds, the child needs some way of
keeping track  of  what is in the absent character's  mind  when  the
object  is moved  from  the first  location  to the second. The  child's
linguistic  ability  may  be  crucial  because  it  allows  the  child  to
represent the character's representation  of the situation in the  face
of  the  conflicting  situation  in  the  visual  display.  As  Plaut  and
Karmiloff-Smith  (1993, p. 70)  said,

We believe the developmental  results are best interpreted  in terms of
increasing capability in using and generating symbolic representations
that  are  sufficiently  well  elaborated  to  override  the  otherwise  com-
pelling  interpretations  generated  by  direct  experience.  Furthermore,
language  is  central  to  theory-of-mind  processes  precisely  because  it
provides particularly  effective  "scaffolding"  for  symbolic  representa-

In our view, it is the structural features of language that are crucial
here because  although the same objects  are involved in the visual
experience  and in the linguistic representation,  they  differ  in  their
spatial  arrangements.  Syntactic  abilities  are  needed  to  represent
these  arrangements.

Our  findings  are  consistent  with  de  Villiers'  (1995)  argument
that syntactic development—specifically,  the acquisition of  object
complementation—promotes  false-belief  understanding  because
the  syntax  of  complementation  provides  the  format  needed  to
represent  false  beliefs.  The  critical point  is the fact  that  the  char-
acter  takes  his  or  her  representation  as  the  actual  situation.  Rep-
resentation  of  this  fact  necessitates  the  use  of  a  construction  in
which  the  mistaken  representation  is  embedded  in  a  true  report:
"John thinks that the chocolate is in the cupboard," which requires
the use of an object complement. Our data, however, do not speak

directly  to  this  issue,  because  the  syntactic  items  on  the  Test  of
Early  Language  Development  do  not  include  any  instances  of
object  complementation.

We  agree  with  de  Villiers  (1995)  that  syntax  is important.  We
also recognize that the syntax of object complementation is needed
to report false beliefs. We are not convinced, however, that it is the
acquisition  of  this  specific  syntactic  construction  that  produces
false-belief  understanding in the child. Evidence against this view
is provided  by  the numerous  examples  of  object  complements  in
the productive  speech  of  young  3-year-olds  (Bartsch  & Wellman,
1995).  One  might  argue  that  these  are  precocious  children  who
might  also have passed  a  false-belief  task  had  one been  given  to
them  (Perner,  1988).  Our  data  speak  against  this,  however.  We
have parental diary  data and video recordings  of pretend play  for
a  subsample  of  children  in  this  study  that  include  examples  of
object complements produced by children in the same time period
in which they  were failing  the theory-of-mind  tasks (Astington &
Jenkins,  1995).  One  might  argue  that  object  complementation
comes  in  first,  and  false-belief  understanding  follows.  However,
the force  of the argument may be lost if  the time lag is too great.
Moreover, further evidence against the precise link between object
complementation  and  false-belief  understanding  is  provided  by
Custer's  (1996) finding  that 3-year-olds can respond correctly in a
picture  choice  task  when  the  test  scenario  includes  a  sentence of
the form  [person]-[is  pretending]-[that  x]  (e.g., "He  is  pretending
that his puppy  is outside")  but not when it includes  a sentence of
the form  [person]-[thinks]-[that x] (e.g., "He thinks that his puppy
is outside"). Both types of sentence include the same object  com-
plement, yet children pass the task when "pretend" is used and fail
when  "think"  is  used.  Something  more  than  the  acquisition  of
object  complementation  is  required  to  explain  why  children  can
respond  correctly  in  one case but  not in  the  other.

We  must  acknowledge  that  our  data  can  be  interpreted  differ-
ently.  An  alternative  interpretation  is  that  theory  of  mind  and
language  both  depend  on  some  other  factor;  that  is,  some  under-
lying factor  brings about development in both theory  of mind and
language. We might suppose that this is some internal factor,  such
as  working  memory  or  executive  function.  Let  us  suppose  that
language  competence,  especially  syntactic  competence,  and
theory-of-mind  task  performance  are  both  manifestations  of  the
same underlying  structure. If the language test is a better measure
of  this  structure  than the theory-of-mind  measure  is, then even if
we  control  for  theory  of  mind  at  an  earlier  age,  there  is  still  a
substantial  amount of  variance in the theory-of-mind  scores to be
explained  at the later age. The earlier language measure does this
because  it  is  a better  measure  of  the underlying  third  factor.  We
cannot  rule out  this interpretation  of  these  data.

Nonetheless,  whether  the relation  is  direct  or indirect,  the  data
we report  make  it  clear  that  there  is a  relation  between  language
and  theory  of  mind.  Does  this  add  anything  to  our  knowledge?
More  than  20 years  ago, research  in  social cognition  showed  that
performance  on  measures  of  language  competence,  such  as  the
Peabody  Picture  Vocabulary  Test,  correlated  significantly  with
measures  of  perspective  taking.  What  advance  does  the  current
research  make?  First,  there  is  the  large  issue  of  differences  be-
tween  perspective-taking  research  in  the  1960s  and  1970s  and
current  theory-of-mind  research.  Perspective-taking  tasks  varied
enormously: There were different  definitions  of perspective taking
and widely  different  ways of measuring it (Chandler,  1977; Light,

LANGUAGE  AND  THEORY OF MIND

1319

1987).  Theory-of-mind  researchers,  however,  use  "standard"  (if
not  standardized)  false-belief  tests, defined  in terms of  metarepre-
sentational  development.  More  important,  perspective-taking  re-
search assumed that young children  were egocentric  and could not
understand  another's  viewpoint,  whereas  theory-of-mind  research
integrates children's understanding of their own and other people's
mental  states.  That  is,  the  tasks  ask  children  to  predict  another's
false  belief  and  to remember  their  own  in the same  situation,  and
they show that children  come to understand both at the same time,
which  supports  the  argument  that  children  develop  an  integrated
theory  of  mind  (Gopnik  & Astington,  1988). Second, the  correla-
tions reported  between  verbal  ability  and perspective  taking  were
generally  in  the  range  from  .20  to  .40  and  were  not  significant
when  age  was  controlled  (Shantz,  1983).  Correlations  between
verbal  ability  and  false-belief  task  performance  are  considerably
higher  (in  comparable  cross-sectional  studies)  and  remain  signif-
icant  when  age  is  controlled.  Third,  and  most  important,  in  the
present  study  we  address  the issue of  the direction  of  the  relation
between  language  and  theory  of  mind.

In summary, we argue that theory of mind depends on language.
The  data  we  have  reported  here,  although  not  conclusive,  are
consistent  with  this  claim.  In  our  view,  it is not just  that  children
need language  skills to display  their theory  of mind in  false-belief
tasks.  Language  plays  a  fundamental  role  in 
theory-of-mind
development.

References

Astington, J. W. (1998). Theory of mind, Humpty Dumpty, and the icebox.

Human Development,  41, 30-39.

Astington, J. W., & Jenkins, J. M. (1995, March). Language and theory of
mind: A theoretical  review and a longitudinal  study. Paper presented at
the Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research in Child  Development,
Indianapolis, IN.

Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of

mind. Cambridge,  MA: Bradford  Books/MIT Press.

Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. M. (1995). Children talk about the mind. New

York:  Oxford  University  Press.

Bretherton,  I.,  McNew,  S., &  Beeghly-Smith,  M.  (1981).  Early  person
knowledge as expressed in gestural and verbal communication: When do
infants  acquire  a  "theory  of  mind"?  In M. E. Lamb  & L. R.  Sherod
(Eds.), Infant social  cognition  (pp. 333-373).  Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Byrne,  R.  W., & Whiten,  A.  (1991).  Computation  and mindreading  in
primate  tactical  deception.  In  A.  Whiten  (Eds.),  Natural  theories of
mind: Evolution,  development  and simulation of everyday mindreading
(pp.  127-141). Oxford,  England:  Basil  Blackwell.

Call,  J.,  &  Tomasello,  M.  (1999).  A  nonverbal  false  belief  task: The

performance  of children  and great  apes.  Child Development,  70,  381—
395.

Chandler,  M. J.  (1977).  Social  cognition:  A selective  review  of  current
research.  In W. F. Overton  & J. M. Gallagher  (Eds.),  Knowledge and
development:  Vol. 1. Advances  in research  and theory  (pp. 93-147).
New  York:  Plenum  Press.

Chandler,  M. J., Fritz,  A. S., & Hala,  S. M. (1989).  Small  scale  deceit:
Deception  as a marker of 2-, 3- and 4-year-olds'  early theories of mind.
Child Development,  60, 1263-1277.

Charman,  T.,  &  Shmueli-Goetz,  Y.  (1998).  The  relationship  between
theory of mind, language ability and narrative discourse: An experimen-
tal  study.  Cahiers  de  Psychologie  Cognitive  [Current  Psychology of
Cognition],  17, 245-271.

Custer, W. L. (1996). A comparison of young children's understanding of

contradictory  representations  in  pretense,  memory,  and belief.  Child
Development,  67, 678-688.

Cutting, A. L., & Dunn, J. (in press). Theory of mind, emotion  understand-
ing, language and family  background:  Individual  differences  and inter-
relations.  Child  Development.

de Villiers, J. G. (1995, March). Steps in the mastery  of sentence comple-
ments.  Paper  presented  at  the  Biennial  Meeting  of  the  Society  for
Research  in Child  Development,  Indianapolis, IN.

Dunn, J. (1988). The beginnings of social understanding. Cambridge, MA:

Harvard  University  Press.

Eisenmajer,  R.,  &  Prior,  M.  (1991).  Cognitive  linguistic  correlates  of
'theory of mind'  ability in autistic children. British Journal of Develop-
mental Psychology,  9, 351-364.

Freeman, N. H., Lewis, C, & Doherty, M. J. (1991). Preschoolers'  grasp
of a desire for knowledge in false-belief  prediction: Practical intelligence
and  verbal  report.  British  Journal  of  Developmental  Psychology,  9,
139-157.

Frith, U.,  Happe, F., & Siddons, F. (1994). Autism and theory of mind in

everyday  life.  Social Development,  3, 108-123.

Gale, E., de Villiers, P., de Villiers, J., & Pyers, J. (1996). Language and
theory  of  mind  in oral  deaf  children.  In A. Stringfellow,  D. Cahana-
Amitay, E. Hughes, & A. Zukowski  (Eds.), Proceedings  of the  Boston
University Conference on Language Development (Vol. l,pp. 213-224).
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla  Press.

Gopnik,  A. (1990).  Developing  the idea  of intentionality:  Children's the-

ories of mind.  Canadian Journal  of Philosophy, 20, 89-114.

Gopnik,  A., & Astington,  J. W. (1988). Children's  understanding  of rep-
resentational change and its relation to the understanding of false  belief
and the appearance-reality  distinction.  Child Development,  59, 26-37.
Happe, F. G. E. (1995). The role of age and verbal ability in the theory of
mind task performance  of subjects  with autism. Child Development, 66,
843-855.

Hresko, W. P., Reid,  D. K., & Hammill, D. D. (1981). The  Test of Early

Language  Development  (TELD).  Austin,  TX:  Pro-Ed.

Hughes, C, & Dunn, J. (1997).  "Pretend  you didn't  know":  Young  chil-
dren's  talk  about  mental  states  in  pretend  play.  Cognitive  Develop-
ment,  12, 477-499.

Jenkins, J. M., & Astington,  J. W. (1996).  Cognitive  factors  and family
structure associated with theory of mind development in young children.
Developmental  Psychology, 32, 70-78.

Leslie,  A., & Roth,  D. (1993).  What  autism  teaches  us about  metarepre-
sentation.  In S. Baron-Cohen,  H. Tager-Flusberg,  & D. Cohen  (Eds.),
Understanding  other  minds:  Perspectives  from  autism  (pp. 83-111).
Oxford,  England:  Oxford  University  Press.

Light,  P. (1987).  Taking  roles.  In J.  Bruner  & H. Haste  (Eds.),  Making

sense  (pp. 41-61).  London:  Methuen.

Mayes,  L. C,  Klin,  A., Tercyak,  K. P., Cicchetti,  D. V., & Cohen, D.
(1996).  Test-retest  reliability  for  false  belief  tasks.  Journal  of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 37, 313-319.

Moore, C, Pure, K., & Furrow, D. (1990). Children's understanding of the
modal expressions of speaker certainty and uncertainty and its relation to
the  development  of a representational  theory  of mind.  Child Develop-
ment, 61, 722-730.

Nelson, K. (1996). Language  in cognitive development. New  York: Cam-

bridge  University  Press.

Olson, D. R. (1988). On the origins of beliefs  and other  intentional  states
in  children.  In J.  W. Astington,  P. L.  Harris,  & D. R. Olson  (Eds.),
Developing  theories  of  mind  (pp. 414-426).  New York:  Cambridge
University  Press.

Perner, J. (1988). Higher  order beliefs  and intentions  in children's  under-
standing of social interaction. In J. W. Astington, P. L. Harris, & D. R.
Olson  (Eds.),  Developing  theories  of mind  (pp.  271-294).  New York:
Cambridge  University  Press.

1320

ASTINGTON  AND JENKINS

Perner,  J.  (1991).  Understanding  the representational  mind. Cambridge,

MA: Bradford  Books/MIT  Press.

(Eds.),  Manual  of  child  psychology:  Cognitive  development  (4th ed.,
Vol. 3, P. H. Mussen,  General  Ed., pp. 495-555). New  York:  Wiley.

Peterson, C. C, & Siegal, M. (1995). Deafness, conversation and theory of

Shatz, M. (1994). A toddler's  life: Becoming a person.  New York:  Oxford

mind. Journal  of Child Psychology  and Psychiatry,  36, 459-474.

Piaget,  J. (1954).  Language  and thought  from  the genetic  point  of view.

Acta  Psychologica,  10, 51-60.

Piaget, J. (1980). The psychogenesis of knowledge and its epistemological
significance. In M. Piatelli-Palmarini  (Ed.), Language and learning: The
debate  between  Jean  Piaget  and Noam  Chomsky  (pp. 23-34). Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard  University  Press.

Plaut, D. C, & Karmiloff-Smith,  A. (1993). Representational  development
and  theory-of-mind  computations.  Behavioral  and Brain  Sciences, 16,
70-71.

Povinelli, D. (1999). Social understanding in chimpanzees: New  evidence
from  a longitudinal approach. In P. D. Zelazo, J. W. Astington, & D. R.
Olson  (Eds.),  Developing  theories  of  intention:  Social  understanding
and self  control  (pp.  195-225). Mahwah,  NJ:  Erlbaum.

Povinelli,  D. J., & deBlois,  S. (1992).  Young  children's  (Homo  sapiens)
understanding  of knowledge formation  in themselves and others. Jour-
nal of Comparative  Psychology,  106, 228-238.

Premack, D., & Woodruff,  G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a theory

of  mind? Behavioral  and Brain  Sciences,  1,  515—526.

Segal,  G.  (1998).  Representing  representations.  In  P.  Carruthers  &  J.
Boucher  (Eds.),  Language  and thought:  Interdisciplinary  themes (pp.
146-161). Cambridge,  England:  Cambridge  University  Press.

Shantz,  C. U. (1983).  Social  cognition.  In J.  H. Flavell  & E.  Markman

University  Press.

Smith,  P. K. (1996).  Language  and the evolution  of  mind-reading.  In P.
Carruthers  &  P. K.  Smith  (Eds.),  Theories  of  theories  of  mind (pp.
344-354). Cambridge,  England:  Cambridge  University  Press.

Tager-Flusberg, H. (1993). What language reveals about the understanding
of minds in children with autism. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg,
&  D.  Cohen  (Eds.),  Understanding  other  minds:  Perspectives  from
autism  (pp.  138-157). Oxford,  England:  Oxford  University  Press.

Tager-Flusberg,  H. (1997). Language  acquisition  and theory  of mind. In
L. B. Adamson & M. A. Romski  (Eds.), Communication and language
acquisition: Discoveries from  atypical development  (pp. 135—160). Bal-
timore, MD: Paul Brookes.

Varley, R. (1998). Aphasic language, aphasic thought: An investigation of
propositional thinking in an a-propositional  aphasic. In P. Carruthers &
J. Boucher (Eds.), Language  and thought: Interdisciplinary  themes (pp.
128-145). Cambridge, England: Cambridge  University  Press.

Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and
constraining  function  of wrong  beliefs  in young children's  understand-
ing of deception.  Cognition, 13, 103-128.

Zelazo, P. D., & Jacques,  S. (1996). Children's  rule  use:  Representation,
reflection,  and cognitive  control.  In R.  Vasta  (Ed.),  Annals  of Child
Development  (Vol.  12, pp. 119-176). London: Jessica  Kingsley.

Sample  Items  From  the Test  of  Early  Language  Development  (Hresko  et al.,  1981)

Appendix

Item 3  (Syntax-Receptive)

Child is shown a card with 2 pictures on it: (a) car bumping into back of
truck,  (b) truck  bumping  into back of car.  Experimenter  says: "Show me
"The car hit the truck.' "

Child is shown a card with 2 pictures on it: (a) girl near chair, boy  further
away, (b) boy near chair, girl further  away. Experimenter  says: "Show me
'Mary  is closer  to the chair.'  "

Child is shown a card with 2 pictures on it: (a) group of children running,
(b) group of children standing. Experimenter says: "Show me "The children
are not running.'  "

Scoring: Child  has to get two correct  out of the three.

Item  11  (Semantics-Expressive)

Experimenter  shows  picture  to child  and says:  "Look  at this  picture.
Listen while I tell you about it. This is a clown. He is doing handstands. He
works in a circus. He is funny."  Experimenter  then  shows child a picture
of a fireman  spraying  water from  a hose onto a fire  and asks child to tell
her  about it. If child  says only  that it is a fireman,  he or she is prompted,
"Can you tell me more?"

Experimenter  shows child a picture of a woman with a shopping cart, in
a  store, taking  bread off a shelf. Experimenter  asks child to tell her about
it and prompts  if needed.

Scoring: Child must mention both the person and the activity for each of

the pictures.

Item  14  (Semantics-Receptive)

Child is shown a card with 7 pictures on it. Experimenter says: "Point to
the picture of the word I say." After the child points, another word is given.

The words are glasses,  shade, bug, and run.
Scoring: All four  have to be correct.

Item  21  (Syntax-Expressive)

Child  is shown  a card  with  3 pictures  on it: (a) dog on chair,  (b)  dog
behind  chair,  (c) dog under  chair.  Experimenter  points to each  picture in
turn and says to child: "Look at this picture and tell me where the dog is."

Scoring: Child has to get all three  correct.

Note. 

Items  described  above  are from  The Test  of  Early  Language
Development  (TELD) by W. P. Hresko, D. K. Reid,  and D. D. Hammill,
1981,  Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. Copyright  1981 by Pro-Ed,  Inc. Adapted  with
permission.

Received  September  28, 1998
Revision  received  March  17,  1999

Accepted  March  18, 1999  •

