Child Development, November/December 2011, Volume 82, Number 6, Pages 1887–1905

Peer Relations and the Understanding of Faux Pas: Longitudinal Evidence

for Bidirectional Associations

Robin Banerjee
University of Sussex

Dawn Watling

Royal Holloway, University of London

Marcella Caputi
University of Pavia

Research connecting children’s understanding of mental states to their peer relations at school remains scarce.
Previous work by the authors demonstrated that children’s understanding of mental states in the context of a
faux pas—a social blunder involving unintentional insult—is associated with concurrent peer rejection. The
present report describes a longitudinal follow-up investigation of 210 children from the original sample, aged
5–6 or 8–9 years at Time 1. The results support a bidirectional model suggesting that peer rejection may
impair the acquisition of faux pas understanding, and also that, among older children, difﬁculties in under-
standing faux pas predict increased peer rejection. These ﬁndings highlight the important and complex associ-
ations between social understanding and peer relations during childhood.

Children’s social understanding has been a major
focus of developmental psychology research over
the last 25 years. Work on this topic has revealed
reliable developmental progressions in children’s
understanding of mental states, such as beliefs,
emotions, intentions, and desires, which are clearly
pertinent to human social behavior (e.g., Flavell,
2004; Hughes & Leekam, 2004). Moreover, there is
dramatic evidence of individual differences in this
kind of
(ToM) understanding.
Research with individuals on the autistic spectrum
has suggested that signiﬁcant social impairments
can be linked to difﬁculties in reasoning about
mental states (e.g., Baron-Cohen, 1995; Happe´,
1994, 1995). Such evidence supports the intuitively
appealing notion that
individual differences in
social understanding are connected with children’s
social interactions and relationships.

‘‘theory-of-mind’’

Many research studies have also shown that
there are individual differences in social under-

standing within typically developing samples.
Existing theoretical and empirical work gives us
reason to expect close connections between these
individual differences on the one hand and varia-
tions in children’s social interactions and relation-
ships on the other (e.g., Dunn, 1995; Repacholi &
Slaughter, 2003). However, our knowledge of the
social antecedents and consequences of children’s
social understanding is far from complete. Perhaps
most neglected of all is the relevance of school-aged
children’s social understanding to their interactions
and relationships with their peers. Given the recog-
nized importance of peer relations at school in chil-
dren’s development
(e.g., Ladd, 1999; Rubin,
Bukowski, & Parker, 2006), investigations of this
issue are sorely needed. The present study exam-
ines longitudinal connections between children’s
performance on an age-appropriate measure of
social understanding—the faux pas task—and their
levels of peer acceptance and rejection at school.

We would like to extend our thanks and appreciation to the
children and staff at the schools who participated in this study,
and to Beatrice Birtell, Nathalie Elsaesser, Dimitra Fotopoulou,
Sophy Grifﬁn-Beale, Laura Kerr, Tara Sims, Rachel Stock, Ashley
Thomas, Sarah Watson, and Alexandra Yates for their contribu-
tion to data collection. This research was funded by Brighton &
Hove City Council.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Robin Banerjee, School of Psychology, University of Sussex,
Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QH, UK. Electronic mail may be sent to
robinb@sussex.ac.uk.

Social Understanding and Social Relationships

Carpendale and Lewis (2004) have proposed
theoretical
social

formulation of

children’s

a

Ó 2011 The Authors
Child Development Ó 2011 Society for Research in Child Development, Inc.
All rights reserved. 0009-3920/2011/8206-0014
DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2011.01669.x

1888 Banerjee, Watling, and Caputi

understanding that explicitly emphasizes the con-
struction of social understanding within the context
of social interaction. Not surprisingly, most of the
extant empirical evidence indicating such social
construction has concerned family processes. These
include common forms of triadic interaction experi-
enced during infancy (e.g., social referencing, gaze
following, pointing), but the presence and quality
of enduring social relationships is also likely to be
important. For example, some research identiﬁes
having older siblings as conferring an advantage to
children on false belief tasks (e.g., Ruffman, Perner,
Naito, Parkin, & Clements, 1998), and numerous
longitudinal studies have pointed to aspects of the
parent–child relationship as inﬂuencing children’s
understanding of mental states. These studies high-
light the importance of broad variables such as
parental warmth,
and
harshness (e.g., Meins et al., 2002; Pears & Moses,
2003), as well as
family
interactions such as references to mental states in
conversations (e.g., Adria´n, Clemente, & Villanu-
eva, 2007; Dunn, Brown, & Beardsall, 1991; Ensor &
Hughes, 2008; Peterson & Slaughter, 2003; Ruffman,
Slade, & Crowe, 2002).

features of

attachment,

sensitivity,

speciﬁc

the evidence for

Adding to this literature is a body of work inves-
tigating the reverse causal connection, namely, the
impact of social understanding on children’s social
interactions. In contrast with the many analyses of
autism that attribute signiﬁcant
relational and
impairments to inadequacies in social
behavioral
understanding,
the ‘‘real-life’’
manifestations of individual differences in typically
developing children’s social understanding is less
than overwhelming. Hughes and Leekam’s (2004)
review provides many sound reasons for expecting
ToM to predict social relations, but the number of
empirical studies that have actually linked individ-
ual differences in ToM to variations in social rela-
tions is fairly small. Some studies have shown that
children who are relatively advanced on ToM tasks
display more elaborate pretend play (e.g., Hughes
& Dunn, 1997; Taylor & Carlson, 1997) and also
exhibit greater social competence—such as more
cooperation and less conﬂict—than children with
lower ToM performance (e.g., Bosacki & Astington,
1999; Cassidy, Werner, Rourke, Zubernis, & Balar-
aman, 2003; Lalonde & Chandler, 1995; Watson,
Nixon, Wilson, & Capage, 1999). However, the con-
nection between ToM performance and social inter-
actions is not always found (e.g., Badenes, Estevan,
& Bacete, 2000). The lack of a solid research base
demonstrating the social advantages conferred by
strengths in social understanding is somewhat

surprising, insofar as the notion of ‘‘social compe-
tence’’ is widely assumed to encompass good social
understanding (e.g., Rose-Krasnor, 1997).

Social Understanding in the Peer Context

We believe that children’s interactions with other
children, outside the family context, are a key con-
text for the construction and manifestation of social
understanding. Unfortunately, this issue has not
been addressed adequately. Part of the problem is
that research on social-cognitive development has
largely focused on the period up to 5 years of age,
during which the family may be assumed to be the
dominant socializing context. On the other hand, it
is noteworthy that some of the most commonly
cited developments in social understanding—such
as false belief understanding—occur between 3 and
5 years of age (e.g., Wellman, Cross, & Watson,
2001), a time when peer interaction increases dra-
matically for many children in Western cultures.
Moreover, the peer context in early, middle, and
late childhood has long been recognized by devel-
opmental theorists as providing important opportu-
nities not only for learning sociobehavioral skills
such as sharing and turn taking but also for making
advances in empathy and perspective taking (e.g.,
Eisenberg, Fabes, & Spinrad, 2006).
in
response to Carpendale and Lewis’s (2004) article
on the social construction of social understanding,
both Banerjee (2004) and Zerwas, Balaraman, and
Brownell (2004) argued that peer interactions pro-
vide an important context for the development of
children’s social understanding. Yet, despite evi-
dence showing that children vary dramatically in
the quantity and quality of peer interactions they
experience
2003),
empirical evidence linking features of peer relations
to variations
in social understanding remains
scarce.

(Gifford-Smith & Brownell,

Indeed,

Some

important observational

studies have
shown us that children’s interactions with their
friends do appear to provide valuable opportunities
for learning about the mind. Children talk about
mental states in their peer play, as well as in con-
versations with families, and the peer context often
involves highly relevant experiences such as pre-
tend play (e.g., Howes & Matheson, 1992; Lillard,
1993; Youngblade & Dunn, 1995). In line with this,
some
shown that
children’s belief and emotion understanding can be
predicted by
friendship
interaction (e.g., Faulkner & Miell, 1993; Maguire &
Dunn, 1997). Moreover, as noted above, other

studies have

longitudinal

features

of

earlier

Peer Relations Faux Pas

1889

authors have suggested that individual differences
in social understanding have consequences for the
qualities of children’s conversations and play inter-
actions with peers (e.g., Cassidy et al., 2003; Cutting
& Dunn, 2006; Hughes, Lecce, & Wilson, 2007;
Lalonde & Chandler, 1995; Slomkowski & Dunn,
1996; Walker, 2005; Watson et al., 1999). Although
some evidence has suggested that advanced social-
cognitive capabilities may sometimes be evident in
children displaying negative behavior such as
bullying (Renouf et al., 2010; Sutton, Smith, &
Swettenham, 1999), most of the work in this area
has pointed to the associations of better social
understanding with more positive interpersonal
relationships and interactions.

abilities may be related to levels of peer acceptance,
although this was apparently only the case among
children older than 5 years of age. Another study
of 3- to 5-year-olds (Peterson & Siegal, 2002) found
that children who were rejected by their peers
lagged behind their more popular counterparts on
ToM tasks.
In contrast, another study (Badenes
et al., 2000) showed no clear link between peer
rejection and mentalizing abilities among 4-
to
6-year-olds at all. Thus, the few extant studies on
this topic do not lend themselves to a coherent
portrayal of the connection between social under-
standing and peer relations, and none provides
longitudinal evidence to suggest
likely develop-
mental pathways.

rejection’’

and ‘‘peer

Notwithstanding the value of the studies dis-
cussed above, we have relatively little insight into
how commonly observed variations in peer rela-
time with children’s
tions are associated over
understanding of
the social and psychological
world they inhabit. Perhaps the most commonly
studied indexes of a school-aged child’s peer rela-
tions concern the extent to which he or she is liked
or disliked by the peer group. Long-standing socio-
metric techniques, commonly involving three posi-
tive and three negative peer nominations made by
each child in a class, are widely used in the peer
relations literature to uncover these levels of ‘‘peer
acceptance’’
(often put
together in order to classify children into peer
status categories, such as popular or rejected) and
an extensive literature is devoted to understanding
the antecedents and consequences of these markers
of children’s peer relations (e.g., Rubin et al., 2006).
The use of sociometric techniques to elucidate dif-
ferences in the interpersonal functioning of children
at school has been ﬁrmly established over many
decades and has the advantage of drawing on mul-
tiple informants (multiple peers) with privileged
access to interactions with each other across multi-
ple formal and informal settings (see Pepler &
Craig, 1998). Moreover, reviews of studies utilizing
sociometric nominations have shown that
these
data map closely onto qualities of peer interaction
and self-reported socioemotional experiences (e.g.,
Gifford-Smith & Brownell, 2003; Newcomb, Bukow-
ski, & Pattee, 1993).

Despite the extensive body of work on the corre-
lates of sociometric acceptance and rejection, only a
small number of studies have considered links with
children’s performance on social understanding
tasks. One study of 4- to 6-year-olds (Slaughter,
Dennis, & Pritchard, 2002) provided some indica-
tions that
individual differences in mindreading

The Faux Pas Task

One of the difﬁculties in establishing connections
between social understanding and peer relations
may be that standard ToM tasks do not adequately
capture the forms of mental-state reasoning that are
most pertinent to real-life social interactions and
relationships. This is especially so when we move
beyond the ages of 5 or 6; undoubtedly, there are
substantial variations in pupils’ social behavior in
middle childhood, but
these clearly cannot be
mapped onto performance on ToM tasks that most
children pass by 6 years. However, there is some
tentative evidence that more ‘‘naturalistic’’ mea-
sures of mental-state reasoning, tapping the under-
standing of links between multiple mental states
(e.g.,
in everyday
social situations, may have some connection with
school-aged pupils’ interpersonal relations. Speciﬁ-
cally, one recent study has shown that peer rejec-
tion in school-aged children is associated with
performance on the faux pas measure of social
understanding (Banerjee & Watling, 2005).

intentions, emotions, beliefs)

The faux pas task was ﬁrst conceived in the con-
text of work with high-functioning autistic individ-
uals, a signiﬁcant proportion of whom perform
successfully on standard ToM tasks despite clearly
showing distinctive sociobehavioral and relational
impairments (e.g., Dahlgren & Trillingsgaard, 1996).
Baron-Cohen, O’Riordan, Stone, Jones, and Plaisted
(1999) showed that such participants display difﬁ-
culties in the ability to identify and explain ‘‘faux
pas’’ situations where one character unintentionally
insults another due to lack of knowledge about
some key feature of the other character (e.g., mak-
ing a derogatory comment about dinner ladies to
another child whose mother—unbeknownst to the
protagonist—is herself a dinner lady). Importantly,

1890 Banerjee, Watling, and Caputi

several recent studies with typically developing
children have shown that performance on the faux
pas task is associated with other complex forms of
social
2002), with
teacher ratings of sociability (Banerjee & Hender-
son, 2001), and with peer rejection (Banerjee &
Watling, 2005).

reasoning (Banerjee,

2000,

state and was

These studies provide persuasive evidence that
the faux pas task taps mental-state reasoning that is
relevant to everyday peer interaction. In Banerjee
and Watling’s (2005) adaptation of the faux pas task,
children responded to a series of questions follow-
ing each hypothetical story, showing whether or not
they detected the faux pas, understood that one
character has upset another, and recognized that
this upset occurred as a result of an underinformed
knowledge ⁄ belief
therefore not
intended. Crucially, the authors found that 8- to 9-
year-old children who received more negative socio-
metric nominations from their classmates performed
less well on the task. This association was not due to
basic comprehension or to ﬁrst-order understanding
of the emotional impact of the faux pas but rather to
the more complex recognition that the upset was not
intentional and to the appreciation of the ignorance
that led to the faux pas. No such association was
found in a sample of 5- to 6-year-olds, most of
whom performed poorly on the task. The report on
that investigation also noted the distinctive impor-
tance of the faux pas task in particular, since a ver-
sion of Sullivan, Zaitchik, and Tager-Flusberg’s
(1994) second-order false belief task was not signiﬁ-
cantly correlated with levels of social preference
after controlling for the faux pas scores (whereas
faux pas scores remained signiﬁcantly correlated
with social preference even after controlling for the
second-order false belief performance; in our longi-
tudinal follow-up study, we noted that the second-
order false belief task was correlated with the faux
pas task at each time point, even after controlling for
receptive vocabulary (all partial rs > .29, p < .001).
Therefore, we again evaluated the potential impor-
tance of the second-order false belief task as an ante-
cedent or consequence or differences
in peer
relations. However, there were no signiﬁcant cross-
lagged pathways between our measures of peer
relations and scores on the second-order false belief
task after controlling for receptive vocabulary (all
partial |r|s < .13, p > .30). Therefore, we have
excluded the second-order false belief task from the
main analysis reported here).

These results raise the intriguing question of
how distinctive the faux pas task is in capturing an
aspect of social understanding that clearly relates to

real-life peer experiences. Clearly, it stands out as a
more demanding task than the standard ﬁrst-order
false belief
task, which is typically passed by
4–5 years of age (Wellman et al., 2001). Yet, as the
evidence above implies, it also differs from other
relatively demanding assessments of mental-state
reasoning, such as second-order false belief tasks,
insofar as it maps onto real-life differences in inter-
personal relations in a more intimate way. In fact,
this distinctive link between faux pas reasoning
and peer
relationships corresponds with early
work—predating research on ToM—that connected
children’s skills in perspective taking with qualities
of their social behavior and relationships.

In the late 1960s and early 1970s, researchers
were already devising strategies for assessing and
remediating difﬁculties in ‘‘social
role taking’’
(e.g., Chandler, 1973; Chandler, Greenspan, &
Barenboim, 1974; Flavell, Botkin, Fry, Wright, &
Jarvis, 1968). These authors showed how,
for
example, sequences of cartoons could be used to
reveal some children’s difﬁculties in ‘‘discount
[ing] their own understanding of the test situa-
tions and adopt[ing] the roles of persons less well
informed than themselves’’ (Chandler et al., 1974,
p. 548). At around the same time, an elaborate
stage model of
increasing sophistication in role
taking was developed by Selman (1976, 1980),
who went on to consider how differences in role
taking are manifested in different ‘‘interpersonal
negotiation strategies’’ (Selman, Beardslee, Schultz,
Krupa, & Podorefsky, 1986). The theoretical impli-
cation of these early investigations was that a full
and mature appreciation of others’ perspectives
leads to qualitatively different experiences of peer
interaction, in comparison to a more ‘‘egocentric’’
perspective;
indeed, Vernberg, Ewell, Beery, and
Abwender (1994) have shown that 12- to 14-year-
old pupils with more sophisticated negotiation
strategies tend to develop greater intimacy and
companionship when establishing new friend-
ships.

The precise details of social understanding impli-
cated in a child’s perspective-taking performance
often remained opaque in this work, but one
important feature of the early conceptualizations of
developments in perspective taking was that chil-
dren were not assumed to undergo a seismic shift
from no understanding to full understanding of
others’ perspectives. Unfortunately,
in the years
that
children’s gradually increasing
sophistication in understanding others’ mental
states was to a large extent overshadowed by the
focus on a single transition in recognizing the rep-

followed,

resentational nature of belief states as measured by
the false belief task (Chandler, 2001). Now, how-
ever, we can return to the notion of a complex and
multifaceted model of social understanding, emerg-
ing within the context of children’s interactions
with social partners in order to understand why the
faux pas task may serve as an important correlate
of real-life peer relations.

and interpretations

of

Even in Chandler and colleagues’ cartoon task,
skillful perspective taking required far more than
an appreciation of false belief. In fact, LeMare and
Rubin (1987), in the course of demonstrating that
performance on the cartoon task was linked with
qualities of peer interaction, noted that successful
role taking in this cartoon task required, among
other components, not only a recognition of how
certain antecedent situations could bring about a
character’s emotional state but also how another
character without information about those anteced-
ent situations could form inaccurate cognitive rep-
resentations
the ﬁrst
character’s emotional behavior. We believe that this
linkage of situational events, emotional states, and
cognitive representations (inﬂuenced by access to
information) maps closely onto the kinds of social
insights needed for understanding a faux pas. The
appreciation of
this interplay between cognitive
and emotional states is not tapped by standard
ﬁrst- or second-order ToM tasks (which typically
address only beliefs about the physical identity or
location of inanimate objects). The faux pas task
may also differ in this respect from other measures
of relatively ‘‘advanced’’ social understanding that
still concentrate mainly on cognitive representa-
tions of one’s own or another person’s belief states
(e.g., double-bluff,
etc.;
Carpendale & Chandler, 1996; Happe´, 1993).

interpretive diversity,

The Present Study

Building on our hypothesis that the faux pas task
offers a distinctively powerful tool for capturing
the social understanding involved in everyday peer
the present study reports on a 24-
interactions,
month longitudinal
follow-up of children from
Banerjee and Watling’s (2005) study. Tracking the
children’s faux pas understanding and sociometric
scores over time provides a valuable opportunity to
evaluate likely sequential pathways from faux pas
understanding to peer relations, and from peer
relations to faux pas understanding. We believe
that both pathways are likely, in line with Hughes
and Leekam’s (2004) argument that social relations
may both transform and be transformed by chil-

Peer Relations Faux Pas

1891

dren’s ToM. Our analysis should help to address
several key predictions that could not be tested in
the original study. First, we can evaluate whether
peer rejection is likely to hinder children’s acquisi-
tion of advanced mental-state reasoning skills.
Banerjee and Watling indicated that the presence of
highly negative social relations, rather than the
absence of highly positive social relations, might be
especially predictive of difﬁculties in learning about
faux pas situations. We expect that this would be
especially true over periods when children typically
make the most progress in the faux pas task
(between 7 and 9 years for girls and between 9 and
in Baron-Cohen et al., 1999;
11 years for boys,
between 6 and 8 years,
in Banerjee, 2000), since
active rejection and social exclusion will reduce
opportunities to learn from peer interactions.

Second, we can evaluate the extent to which faux
pas scores relate to subsequent peer relations. We
expect that difﬁculties in faux pas early on (e.g.,
around 5–6 years) are unlikely to be related to peer
rejection since such difﬁculties would be normative
for children at that age, but it is unclear whether
better faux pas understanding may over time lead
to increased peer acceptance. However, if the faux
pas task does indeed capture the kind of social
understanding that is involved in everyday peer
interaction, we can justiﬁably predict that when
most children have typically made progress in
understanding faux pas, those who stand out with
relatively poor performance will be more likely to
experience growing peer rejection. Following on
from the pattern noted by Banerjee and Watling
(2005), we expect that these negative sequelae of
faux pas understanding will primarily reﬂect the
consequences of difﬁculties in the more complex
and subtle aspects of social reasoning in this task,
speciﬁcally, a relatively poorer understanding of
the ignorance and lack of intention on the part of
the protagonist making the faux pas. The present
study offers the ﬁrst opportunity to test such
hypotheses about longitudinal associations between
social understanding and peer relations in school-
aged children.

Method

Participants

The present study concerns data from 210 chil-
dren, in two age groups, who were part of the sam-
ple described by Banerjee and Watling (2005). At the
ﬁrst time point of data collection, the younger group
consisted of 31 boys and 41 girls aged approxi-

1892 Banerjee, Watling, and Caputi

mately 6 years (M = 5.98, SD = .29), and the older
group consisted of 78 boys and 60 girls aged approx-
imately 9 years (M = 9.02, SD = .27). The children
were seen again at two time points 12 months (aged
7 or 10 years) and 24 months (aged 8 or 11 years)
later. The children, who were all in classes partici-
pating in a longitudinal project on social-cognitive
and socioemotional development, attended seven
primary schools situated in urban and suburban
neighborhoods in a city in the United Kingdom. The
schools covered a wide range of socioeconomic sta-
tus (percentage claiming free school meals ranged
from 5.3% to 45.7%), and their pupils were predomi-
nantly White in ethnicity (percentage from ethnic
minorities ranged from 2% to 14%).

The present sample included all children from
Banerjee and Watling’s (2005) study who were still
in the same school and available to complete all
tasks at both follow-up time points (68% of the ori-
ginal sample). For both age groups, the longitudinal
sample did not score signiﬁcantly differently on
Time 1 faux pas performance or peer rejection from
those who did not complete both follow-ups (all
ts < 1.62, ps > .10). However, among the younger
children, the longitudinal sample scored higher on
peer acceptance than those who did not complete
the
vs.
M = ).27, SD = .89), t(118) = 2.47, p < .05. No such
effect was observed for the older children (t < 1).

follow-ups

SD = 1.00

(M = .18,

two

The materials, measures, and procedures relating
to the faux pas and sociometric nominations tasks
are described in Banerjee and Watling (2005); the
details are reproduced below.

Materials

Children completed all tasks using a multimedia
computer interface designed and created by the
authors using Runtime Revolution software. All
responses were made by using a mouse to click on
on-screen buttons, and all text on the screen (e.g.,
instructions, stories, questions, response options,
etc.) was read out loud to the child via headphones.
The tasks were presented on PCs running Windows
95,
or
computer
laboratories.

schools’

in the

2000

98,

pleted a number of other measures (assessing self-
presentational understanding and moral reasoning)
that are not addressed here.

that

Faux pas.. Children completed this measure at
each of the three time points. Children were told
(orally and through on-screen text)
they
would hear four different stories, that they should
listen carefully to the stories, and that they would
be asked some questions at the end of each story.
They then were presented with four faux pas sto-
ries
in random order, each followed by six
forced-choice questions in a ﬁxed order. A single
cartoon-style illustration accompanied each story,
and all
instructions, story text, questions, and
response options were presented orally. Each
story involved two child story characters where
the ‘‘insulting’’ character makes an unintentional
insult about some target object and a neutral
statement
is made by the ‘‘insulted’’ character.
The insulting character was always ignorant with
respect
to the insulted character’s relation with
the target object. For example, in one story, one
character says a painting is awful
to a second
character, not realizing that he was the person
who had painted it. The order in which the faux
pas and neutral statements appeared was counter-
stories. The six forced-choice
balanced across
questions are
correct
answer identiﬁed in italics.

listed below, with the

1. Detection—In the story, did someone say
something they should not have said? (Yes or
No).

2. Identiﬁcation—What was said that should not
have been said? ([insult by insulting character]
or [neutral statement by insulted character]).

3. Feelings—How does [insulted character] feel

now? (Happy ⁄ Pleased or Sad ⁄ Upset).

4. Intention—Did [insulting character] want to
make [insulted character] upset? (Yes or
No).

5. Comprehension—[question regarding target

object] (Correct answer or Incorrect answer).

6. Ignorance—Did [insulting character] know
[insulted character’s relationship with the tar-
get object]? (Yes or No).

Measures

At each time point of the longitudinal study,
children completed a battery of measures using the
multimedia computer interface. The measures rele-
vant
investigation are described
below. It should be noted that children also com-

to the present

The six questions were presented in a ﬁxed order
after each story. All response options appeared as
on-screen buttons, and children used a mouse to click
on these buttons in order to make their responses.
The order of correct and incorrect response options
was counterbalanced across stories, with the excep-
tion of the ﬁrst, fourth, and sixth questions, where

Yes and No response buttons remained in ﬁxed posi-
tions in accordance with a standard presentation of
these buttons in other tasks in the battery. The ﬁrst
two and the last two questions correspond to the four
questions listed in Baron-Cohen et al. (1999), with
the exception that forced-choice response options
were presented to the children. Two stories involved
a male character making the faux pas and two stories
involved a female character making the faux pas. A
sample story and question set is presented in the
Appendix.

Peer acceptance and rejection.. Children completed
this measure at each of the three time points. Chil-
dren were presented with a class photograph and
the following instructions (presented orally and in
on-screen text):

Please click on the faces of three children in your
class who you would really like to play with.
Then click on the green ‘‘OK’’ button to go on. If
you change your mind, click on the red ‘‘Start
Again’’ button.

A black oval ring ‘‘button’’ surrounded each face
on the screen and when the mouse-controlled poin-
ter was moved over each ring the child would hear
the name of the corresponding child. When a face
was clicked, the corresponding name would appear
in a space near the bottom of the screen and the
button around that face was disabled. Children
could clear the selection and start over at any point
by clicking on a red Start Again button. If fewer
than three nominations were made,
the child
received an alert which gave him or her the choice
of either completing three nominations or skipping
to the next task. After making the positive nomina-
tions and clicking on a green OK button to indicate
completion, children saw the same class photo-
graph but this time were asked to click on the faces
of three children with whom they would really not
like to play. Children were prevented from nomi-
nating themselves (their own ‘‘button’’ was dis-
abled), but were free to nominate classmates of
either sex. In total, more than 95% of the children at
each time point gave a complete set of six peer
nominations.

Receptive vocabulary. Children completed this
measure once only at the end of the ﬁnal school
year of the project (approximately 3 months after
the third main time point). The task was a comput-
erized adaptation of the British Picture Vocabulary
Scale–Second Edition (Dunn, Dunn, Whetton, &
Burley, 1997; adapted for computer administration
with permission of the publishers).

Peer Relations Faux Pas

1893

Procedure

Each time point of data collection took place in
the second trimester of the school year, so that chil-
dren completing the sociometric assessment would
have had daily experience of being with each other
in class for at least one trimester. At every time
point, children completed the tasks in groups of
between 3 and 7 (with smaller groups for the youn-
ger children). Each child was seated at a computer
in the school’s computer laboratory, spaced apart
from other children as much as possible. They were
given a general introduction to the tasks, and then
put headphones on and clicked on the Start button
on the ﬁrst screen to commence the task. Trained
research assistants were present for all data collec-
tion sessions and provided help with using the
computer interface when required. Few problems
were reported, and all children were familiar with
the use of the mouse. All tasks were presented in a
random order (which, along with the use of head-
phones, helped to preserve individual privacy), and
children completed the battery of tasks in a session
usually lasting between 10 and 20 min, although
there were no time limits on any task.

Scoring

Faux pas.. Consistent with Baron-Cohen et al.
(1999), children had to answer all questions for a
story correctly in order to pass that story (scoring 1
point). Thus, correct answers to all 24 questions in
the task would lead to a faux pas score of 4. Since
there were two response options for each of 6 ques-
tions, the probability of passing a story by random
guessing is very low (.016; across four stories, .06).
Also, for each of the 6 faux pas questions (Detec-
tion, Identiﬁcation, Feelings, Intention, Comprehen-
sion, Ignorance), we calculated a score out of 4
representing the number of stories in which the
question was answered correctly.

Peer acceptance and rejection.. Following Coie and
the numbers of ‘‘like’’ and
Dodge (1983, 1988),
‘‘dislike’’ nominations received by each participant
were standardized within each classroom (i.e., con-
verted to z scores such that the mean number of
received nominations in a given class becomes a z
score of 0), resulting in Peer Acceptance and Peer
Rejection scores, respectively.

Results

We ﬁrst examined age and gender differences in
performance on the faux pas task. Table 1 shows

1894 Banerjee, Watling, and Caputi

Table 1
Mean Scores on the Faux Pas Task at Each Time Point, by Age Group and Gender

Younger cohort

Older cohort

Gender

Time 1 (age 6)

Time 2 (age 7)

Time 3 (age 8)

Time 1 (age 9)

Time 2 (age 10)

Time 3 (age 11)

Male
Female
Total

1.19 (1.42)
1.02 (1.31)
1.10 (1.35)

1.52 (1.55)
1.88 (1.62)
1.72 (1.59)

1.77 (1.50)
2.29 (1.42)
2.07 (1.47)

2.44 (1.40)
2.62 (1.35)
2.51 (1.38)

2.74 (1.41)
3.30 (1.06)
2.99 (1.30)

2.71 (1.51)
3.33 (1.19)
2.98 (1.41)

than younger

the children’s mean scores on the faux pas task at
each time point. A mixed design analysis of vari-
ance was conducted on the faux pas scores, with
age group and gender between subjects and time
point within subjects. Receptive vocabulary scores
were included as a covariate. The analysis yielded
a main effect of age group, F(1, 205) = 61.27,
p < .001, partial g2 = .23, with older children scor-
ing higher
children (adjusted
M = 2.84, SE = .09 vs. M = 1.66, SE = .12), and a
main effect of gender, F(1, 205) = 8.58, p < .01, par-
tial g2 = .04, with girls scoring higher than boys
(adjusted M = 2.47, SE = .10 vs. M = 2.03, SE = .11).
There was also a signiﬁcant interaction effect of
Time Point · Gender, F(2, 410) = 3.48, p < .05, par-
tial g2 = .02, with a sharper rise in scores over the
three time points for girls than for boys (girls’
adjusted M = 1.89, SE = .13 vs. M = 2.64, SE = .14;
boys’ adjusted M = 1.77, SE = .14 vs. M = 2.10,
SE = .14). There was also a signiﬁcant main effect
of the receptive vocabulary covariate on the faux
scores, F(1, 205) = 29.34, p < .001, partial
pas
g2 = .13.

Table 2 shows the mean scores on each faux pas
question across the three time points, subdivided
by age group. A mixed design analysis of covari-
ance (ANCOVA) was conducted on the scores for
each question, with time point within subjects, age
group between subjects, and receptive vocabulary
as a covariate in each analysis. There was a signiﬁ-
cant main effect of age group on all questions (all

questions

and

(partial g2s= .11

Fs > 7.47, p < .01, partial g2 > .03), with the strong-
est effect sizes apparent for the Intention and Igno-
rance
.10,
respectively). Over and above this basic develop-
mental contrast, there were signiﬁcant effects of
time point for Detection and Identiﬁcation (both
Fs > 5.44, p < .01, partial g2 > .02), and signiﬁcant
interaction effects of Time Point · Age Group for
Detection, Identiﬁcation, Feelings, and Comprehen-
sion (all Fs > 3.18, p < .05, partial g2 > .01). This
reﬂects the fact that the younger age group in par-
ticular showed a steady increase across the three
time points in responding correctly to those four
questions.

Given the clear age differences in relations
among variables reported by Banerjee and Watling
(2005), we examined each age group separately
from the outset. Tables 3 and 4 show the correla-
tions among the variables at each time point for the
younger and older groups, respectively. There was
robust continuity of individual differences in all
three key variables (faux pas, peer rejection, and
peer acceptance) over the three time points, for
both age groups. Looking within each time point, it
is noteworthy that signiﬁcant correlations between
the faux pas and sociometric scores appeared
mainly at the third time point for the younger
group (i.e., around 8 years old) and at the ﬁrst time
point for the older group (i.e., around 9 years old).
Finally, in line with the ANCOVA reported above,
receptive vocabulary was signiﬁcantly correlated

Table 2
Mean Scores on Speciﬁc Faux Pas Questions at Each Time Point, by Age Group

Younger cohort

Older cohort

Question

Time 1 (age 6)

Time 2 (age 7)

Time 3 (age 8)

Time 1 (age 9)

Time 2 (age 10)

Time 3 (age 11)

Detection
Identiﬁcation
Feelings
Intention
Comprehension
Ignorance

2.46 (1.58)
3.31 (1.06)
3.43 (1.02)
2.81 (1.43)
3.49 (0.71)
2.75 (1.28)

3.18 (1.37)
3.54 (0.92)
3.61 (0.90)
3.08 (1.40)
3.65 (0.70)
3.00 (1.31)

3.51 (0.86)
3.64 (0.92)
3.65 (0.79)
3.01 (1.32)
3.68 (0.71)
2.85 (0.127)

3.62 (0.69)
3.89 (0.36)
3.88 (0.45)
3.38 (1.07)
3.88 (0.33)
3.17 (1.11)

3.55 (0.91)
3.78 (0.73)
3.82 (0.70)
3.70 (0.81)
3.93 (0.39)
3.56 (0.91)

3.38 (1.09)
3.70 (0.85)
3.70 (0.92)
3.67 (0.91)
3.78 (0.80)
3.60 (0.91)

Peer Relations Faux Pas

1895

Table 3
Intercorrelations Among the Variables Over Three Time Points (Younger Age Group)

Time 1 (aged 6 years)

Time 2 (aged 7 years)

Time 3 (aged 8 years)

Peer acc. Peer rej. Faux pas Peer acc. Peer rej. Faux pas Peer acc. Peer rej. Faux pas BPVS

Time 1 (aged 6 years) Peer acc.
Peer rej.
Faux pas
Time 2 (aged 7 years) Peer acc.
Peer rej.
Faux pas
Time 3 (aged 8 years) Peer acc.
Peer rej.
Faux pas
BPVS

—
).28*
.07
.49***
).25*
.07
.26*
).20 
).03
).05

—
).16
).35**
.52***
).12
).36**
.64***
).36**
).19

—
.19
).01
.49***
.21 
).07
.45***
.50***

—
).25*
.19 
.45***
).17
.08
.09

—
).05
).31**
.66***
).30**
).07

—
.18
).19
.56***
.41***

—

).32**
.29*
.12

—

).39***
).14

—

.43***

—

Note. Peer acc. = peer acceptance; Peer rej. = peer rejection; BPVS = British Picture Vocabulary Scale.
 p £ .10. *p £ .05. **p £ .01, ***p £ .001.

Table 4
Intercorrelations Among the Variables Over Three Time Points (Older Age Group)

Time 1 (aged 9 years)

Time 2 (aged 10 years)

Time 3 (aged 11 years)

Peer acc. Peer rej. Faux pas Peer acc. Peer rej. Faux pas Peer acc. Peer rej. Faux pas BPVS

Time 1 (aged 9 years)

Peer acc.
Peer rej.
Faux pas
Time 2 (aged 10 years) Peer acc.
Peer rej.
Faux pas
Time 11 (aged 8 years) Peer acc.
Peer rej.
Faux pas
BPVS

—

).34***
.09
.55***
).34***
.06
.48***
).31
).01
.04

—
).23**
).16 
.55***
).27***
).43***
.67***
).13
).09

—
.25**
).14 
.48***
.16 
).16 
.29***
.21**

—

).37***
.02
.47***
).28***
).11
.07

—
).11
).35***
.53***
.02
).01

—
).03
).26**
.41***
.09

—

).43***
.09
.03

—
).11
).07

—
.13

—

Note. Peer acc. = peer acceptance; Peer rej. = peer rejection; BPVS = British Picture Vocabulary Scale.
 p £ .10. **p £ .01. ***p £ .001.

with faux pas scores at all three time points for the
younger group and at the ﬁrst time point for the
older group.

In order to evaluate the longitudinal relations
among the variables, we tested cross-lagged associ-
ations among the variables from Time 1 to Time 2
and from Time 2 to Time 3. By looking at each age
group separately, we can therefore track develop-
mental pathways from 6 to 7 years and from 7 to
8 years (younger group) and from 9 to 10 years and
from 10 to 11 years (older group). We used Amos
software for structural equation modeling to evalu-
ate these associations. Following recommendations
by Hu and Bentler (1998), we used maximum likeli-
hood-based ﬁt indexes suitable for models with

Ns £ 250, speciﬁcally comparative ﬁt index (CFI)
and standardized root mean square
residual
(SRMR). Hu and Bentler suggest cutoffs of approxi-
mately CFI > .95 and SRMR < .08 to determine
good ﬁt. With each age group, we started with the
cross-lagged model
shown in Figure 1. This
included all autoregressive effects connecting the
same variables over the three time points, as well
as cross-lagged effects of peer acceptance (PA) and
peer rejection (PR) on faux pas (FP) scores at the
subsequent time point, and cross-lagged effects of
FP on PA and PR scores at the subsequent time
point. It should be noted that receptive vocabulary
scores were included as a control variable, predict-
ing all scores at all time points. Finally, we allowed

1896 Banerjee, Watling, and Caputi

Time Point 1 

 

 

 

Time Point 2 

 

 

 

Time Point 3 

Peer Rejection 

Peer Rejection 

Peer Rejection 

Peer Acceptance 

Peer Acceptance 

Peer Acceptance 

Faux Pas 

Faux Pas 

Faux Pas 

Figure 1. Initial model to be tested, showing autoregressive and
cross-lagged effects of key variables over the three time points
(error terms and receptive vocabulary not shown, in order to
enhance clarity).

error terms for the PA and PR scores to covary
within and between time points,
to allow for
unmeasured variables that could have inﬂuenced
the pattern of children’s sociometric nominations.

the

negative

This initial model showed good ﬁt with the data
provided by the younger group, v2(11) = 14.24,
p > .10, CFI = .984, SRMR = .047, but many of the
cross-lagged paths were nonsigniﬁcant. We evalu-
ated a second model without the nonsigniﬁcant
leaving only one signiﬁcant
cross-lagged paths,
cross-lagged
effect:
association
between PR at 7 years and FP at 8 years. This
model, shown in Figure 2 with standardized coefﬁ-
cients, still had good ﬁt, with no signiﬁcant deterio-
ration from the ﬁrst model, v2(18) = 21.49, p > .10,
CFI = .983, SRMR = .062; Dv2(7) = 7.25,
p > .10.
Moreover, an examination of modiﬁcation indexes
showed that adding any further cross-lagged paths
would not signiﬁcantly improve model ﬁt. Finally,
in order to assess whether the cross-lagged paths
were moderated by gender, we evaluated our ini-
tial model before and after forcing all cross-lagged
path coefﬁcients to be equal for boys and girls. Both
models showed good ﬁt (CFI > .95, SRMR < .06),
and there was no signiﬁcant deterioration in ﬁt
after forcing equality across gender, Dv2(8) = 8.22,
p > .10.

With the older age group, we again started with
the model including all cross-lagged paths, but we
added a link between PR and FP at the ﬁrst time
point in line with the known association between

the nonsigniﬁcant

these variables at
this time point. This model
showed good ﬁt, v2(10) = 13.15, p > .10, CFI = .991,
SRMR = .032, but again included many nonsigniﬁ-
cant cross-lagged paths. We evaluated a second
model without
cross-lagged
paths, leaving three signiﬁcant cross-lagged effects:
the negative association between PR at 9 years and
FP at 10 years, the positive association between FP
at 9 years and PA at 10 years, and the negative
association between FP at 10 years and PR at
11 years. This model, shown in Figure 3, continued
to have good ﬁt, without signiﬁcant deterioration
v2(15) = 19.92,
p > .10
from the ﬁrst model,
CFI = .987, SRMR = .042; Dv2(5) = 6.77,
p > .10.
Again, an examination of modiﬁcation indexes
showed that adding any further cross-lagged paths
would not signiﬁcantly improve model ﬁt. Finally,
as for the younger group, we evaluated our initial
model before and after forcing all cross-lagged path
coefﬁcients to be equal for boys and girls. Both
models showed good ﬁt (CFI > .95, SRMR < .05),
and there was no signiﬁcant deterioration in ﬁt
after forcing equality across gender, Dv2(8) = 10.14,
p > .10.

In our ﬁnal analysis, we revisited each of the sig-
niﬁcant cross-lagged paths observed in the above
modeling analysis in order to determine which of
the speciﬁc faux pas questions were responsible for
carrying the effects. First, with regard to the nega-
tive association between age 7 PR and age 8 FP
(after controlling for age 7 FP and receptive vocabu-
lary), we found signiﬁcant partial correlations when
using the faux pas scores for Detection, Identiﬁca-
tion, Feelings, Comprehension, and Ignorance (all
|r|s > |).24|, p < .05). Second, the negative associ-
ation between age 9 PR and age 10 FP (after con-
trolling for age 9 FP and receptive vocabulary)
was signiﬁcant when using the faux pas scores for
Identiﬁcation, Feelings, and Comprehension (all
|r|s > |).18|, p < .04).
the positive
link between age 9 FP and age 10 PA (after control-
ling for age 9 PA and receptive vocabulary) was
signiﬁcant only when using the Intention and Igno-

In contrast,

Aged 6 Years   

 

 

Aged 7 Years   

 

 

Aged 8 Years 

Aged 9 Years   

 

 

Aged 10 Years  

 

 

Aged 11 Years 

Peer Rejection 

Peer Acceptance 

Faux Pas 

.53***

.50***

.38***

Peer Rejection 

.45***

-.26**

Peer Acceptance 

.41***

Peer Rejection 

Peer Rejection 

Peer Acceptance 

Peer Acceptance 

-.22**

Faux Pas 

.46***

Faux Pas 

Faux Pas 

.56***

-.17*

.53***

.22**

.45***

Peer Rejection 

.23**

Peer Rejection 

Peer Acceptance 

.28***

Peer Acceptance 

Faux Pas 

-.12*

.40***

Faux Pas 

Figure 2. Final model for younger age group (error terms and
receptive vocabulary not shown, in order to enhance clarity).
**p £ .01. ***p £ .001.

Figure 3. Final model
for older age group (error terms and
receptive vocabulary not shown, in order to enhance clarity).
**p £ .01. ***p £ .001.

scores

(both rs > .16, p £ .05).
rance faux pas
Finally, the negative correlation between age 10 FP
and age 11 PR (after controlling for age 10 PR and
receptive vocabulary) was also signiﬁcant only
when using the Intention and Ignorance scores
(both |r|s > |).17|, p < .04).

Discussion

This study extended Banerjee and Watling’s (2005)
observation of an inverse association between peer
rejection and faux pas performance among 9-year-
old children by tracking bidirectional links between
sociometric and faux pas scores over a period of
24 months, during which mean-level performance
on faux pas steadily rises. We found that peer rejec-
tion predicted relatively poorer faux pas under-
standing between 7 and 8 years of age and between
9 and 10 years of age. In addition, higher faux pas
performance was
relatively
increased peer acceptance scores from 9 to 10 years
of age, and lower faux pas performance was associ-
ated with relatively increased peer rejection scores
from 10 to 11 years of age. The pattern of longitudi-
nal associations did not signiﬁcantly vary by gen-
der, even though performance on the faux pas task
was generally superior among girls, consistent with
research by Baron-Cohen et al. (1999). Our results
thus present the ﬁrst longitudinal evidence of a
cyclical relation between faux pas understanding
and peer relations during the primary school years.

associated with

The Role of Peer Relations in Social Understanding

the

The

longitudinal

follow-up of

sample
described in Banerjee and Watling (2005) has
allowed us to extend our understanding of the
developmental pathways connecting social under-
standing and peer relations. First, we have shown
that even though the original study found a concur-
rent
link between peer rejection and faux pas
understanding only in the older cohort, at 9 years
of age, the developmental trajectory that connects
these variables in fact begins earlier. Speciﬁcally,
our longitudinal analysis of changes in the younger
cohort shows that peer rejection at 7 years of age
predicted relatively lower
faux pas scores the
following year. This pattern continues in the ﬁrst
two time points of data collection with the older
cohort, as peer rejection at age 9 predicts relatively
lower faux pas scores at age 10. Both of these
effects are occurring at a time when mean-level per-
formance on the faux pas task is showing a steady

Peer Relations Faux Pas

1897

increase. Although longitudinal associations cannot
in themselves demonstrate causal
this
pattern is certainly consistent with our hypothesis
that peer rejection could hinder the acquisition of
faux pas understanding.

inﬂuence,

their

of

aspects

general

social understanding.

These observations fall neatly in line with other
research suggesting that aspects of children’s inter-
personal experiences play a role in the develop-
ment of
In past
research, this has been most convincingly demon-
strated within the family context. As noted earlier,
both
the mother–child
relationship and speciﬁc features such as use of
mental-state language have been implicated in the
development of ToM skills (e.g., Dunn et al., 1991;
Meins et al., 2002; Ruffman, Perner, & Parkin, 1999;
Ruffman et al., 2002). Similarly, a number of studies
have highlighted the role of siblings in this area of
social-cognitive development (McAlister & Peter-
son, 2007; Ruffman et al., 1998). The present study
builds on this evidence by showing how the peer
relations context may be critical
for acquiring
advanced forms of mental-state reasoning.

Particularly noteworthy is the ﬁnding that peer
rejection—not peer acceptance—was the key ante-
cedent of faux pas understanding. This implies that
it is the active rejection of children that carries the
most signiﬁcant implications for faux pas under-
standing. Such a conclusion would ﬁt with what
we know about the impact of peer rejection on
children’s socioemotional experiences and behavior.
Peer rejection is associated with a greater likelihood
of experiencing negative peer treatment as well as a
decline in classroom participation (Buhs & Ladd,
2001). Moreover, chronic peer rejection may lead to
the development of adjustment problems and
severe psychological difﬁculties (Ladd, Herald-
Brown, & Reiser, 2008), and is certainly associated
with greater
(Asher &
Wheeler, 1985). Our research suggests that the con-
sequences of peer rejection are likely to extend
beyond the immediate socioemotional functioning
of children, to the development of social-cognitive
skills and knowledge.

feelings of

loneliness

The results we obtained are consistent with some
existing evidence suggesting that qualities of peer
relations predict biases in children’s social informa-
tion processing (see Dodge & Pettit, 2003). It is
interesting to note that it was the foundational fea-
tures of faux pas reasoning—recognizing the insult
that had been made by the protagonist, under-
standing the impact on the other characters’ feel-
ings, identifying the key story information relevant
to the insult—that were most strongly predicted by

1898 Banerjee, Watling, and Caputi

prior peer rejection. This corresponds with evi-
dence from research on social information process-
ing biases in early elementary school
that peer
rejection predicted poorer encoding of the impor-
tant social cues in ambiguous situations (Dodge
et al., 2003). We therefore suggest that the limited
opportunities for rejected children to experience
positive social engagement with peers may have
crucial consequences for children’s encoding of the
key social cues relevant to the mental states held by
social interactants.

As far back as Piaget’s (1932) work on moral
development, it has been recognized that coopera-
tive social relationships, as opposed to relationships
characterized by constraint, offer unique opportuni-
ties for growth in understanding. However, in our
study, relatively high levels of peer acceptance did
not appear to confer any particular advantages in
terms of subsequent gains in social understanding.
This may reﬂect the fact that the absence of active
rejection is the key factor inﬂuencing social under-
standing; as long as a child is not actively excluded
from peer interactions,
there may be sufﬁcient
opportunities for him or her to make gains in social
reasoning. However, we recognize that particularly
high levels of peer acceptance may well generate or
accelerate patterns of social reasoning not tapped
by the faux pas task. One possibility is that a high
level of positive relations within the peer group
promotes more sophisticated understanding of the
interpretive character of the mind (Carpendale &
Chandler, 1996)—the understanding that, for exam-
ple, two people can be exposed to the same infor-
mation but form entirely different interpretations of
what they have seen—since close positive relation-
ships with a wider range of peers should present
greater opportunity for observing diversity in inter-
pretation of everyday events and situations. A fur-
ther possibility is that
the main social-cognitive
consequences of high levels of peer acceptance are
domain speciﬁc rather than domain general. In this
view, high levels of peer liking may not signiﬁ-
cantly extend generic skills in mental-state reason-
ing but may promote domain-speciﬁc reasoning
about particular kinds of social situations, such as
the consideration of multiple viewpoints in negotia-
tion and compromise (e.g., Selman et al., 1986).
Investigating these hypotheses is an important chal-
lenge for future research.

The Role of Social Understanding in Peer Relations

The present study suggests not only that quali-
ties of peer relations may serve as an important

antecedent of subsequent faux pas understanding
but also that relatively low or high scores on the
faux pas task could have signiﬁcant consequences
for subsequent peer relations. Speciﬁcally, higher
faux pas scores at age 9 predicted relatively higher
peer acceptance at age 10, while lower faux pas
scores at age 10 predicted relatively higher peer
rejection at age 11. These patterns were evident
only in the older cohort, possibly indicating that a
certain degree of progression in faux pas under-
standing must ﬁrst
take place within the peer
group before individual differences in faux pas
scores begin to have any meaningful social con-
sequences. Moreover, the aspects of faux pas rea-
soning most strongly predictive of subsequent peer
relations were those that were the most complex
and demanding, namely, the appreciation of the
ignorance on the part of the protagonist making the
faux pas, and the recognition that the upset caused
to the other character was not intended.

Of greatest interest is the ﬁnding that at 10 years
of age, when mean-level performance on the faux
pas task appears to have a risen to a developmental
plateau, those individuals with lower scores on the
task appear to become relatively more rejected by
their peers over the following year. This emergence
of peer rejection as a consequence of impaired or
delayed faux pas understanding—when the peer
group in general is performing at a high level on the
task—suggests that social understanding has a criti-
cal role to play in children’s interpersonal relation-
ships. This pattern adds to a small but growing
literature clarifying the value of social understand-
ing for social interactions. We noted earlier that ToM
skills have been implicated in the development of
pretend play (e.g., Hughes & Dunn, 1997), connected
communication between friends (e.g., Slomkowski
& Dunn, 1996), and general social competence (e.g.,
Watson et al., 1999). The present study builds on
these ﬁndings by identifying the consequences of
difﬁculties in faux pas understanding for children’s
peer relationships at a time when most of the peer
group is performing well on the task.

The ﬁnding that

Intention and Ignorance
responses were the key antecedents of peer accep-
tance and rejection is particularly interesting, as this
maps neatly onto evidence from social information
processing theory that biases in attribution (and
particularly the presumption of hostile intent) play
a key role in negative social behavior and interper-
sonal relations (Dodge & Pettit, 2003). The faux pas
situation is of particular interest because correct
judgments about intent (or lack thereof) depend on
complex inferences about what
the protagonist

knows of the other character’s preferences. Thus,
the present study encourages us to integrate per-
spectives on information-processing biases with
theoretical views on the development of mental-
state reasoning. This kind of integration is still in
its early days, but already some analyses have
shown that it is a fruitful approach to understanding
children’s socioemotional development. Speciﬁcally,
Banerjee’s (2008) review of social-cognitive factors
involved in childhood anxiety suggests that biases
at various stages of
information processing are
likely to interact with social-cognitive difﬁculties,
notably including difﬁculties in understanding faux
pas (Banerjee & Henderson, 2001).

Implications for Models of Social-Cognitive
Development

involving

signiﬁcantly,

theoretical models of

The present study has important implications
for our
social-cognitive
development, and in particular for our formula-
tions of social-cognitive development beyond the
age of 5 years. Perhaps most
it
shows that peer relations constitute a critical con-
text for the development of social understanding,
with peer rejection not only shaping, but also
being shaped by, children’s reasoning about com-
plex social situations. The peer context offers
unique incentives to understand how people can
have different perspectives on situations and
events, both when managing cooperative peer
group interactions and when handling stressful
situations
competition and conﬂict
(Banerjee, 2004; Zerwas et al., 2004). The notion
interactions should be so
that children’s peer
social understanding is
entwined with their
consistent with the growing importance of
the
peer context in children’s social lives during the
school years. As children grow older, as Parker
and Gottman (1989) pointed out, acceptance by
the peer group becomes an increasingly vital
objective of social
life. Moreover, to proﬁt from
schooling and to be ‘‘ready’’ for academic learn-
ing, children must cooperate with others, avoid
disrupting others’ interactions, and form construc-
tive and supportive relationships with teachers
and peers (e.g., Ladd, Herald, & Kochel, 2006).
Given these changing social priorities,
it seems
entirely appropriate that we begin to study in
more detail the social-cognitive dimension of chil-
dren’s peer experiences.

The results from the present study complement
and extend some of the foundational research that
set the scene for ToM research. The connections

Peer Relations Faux Pas

1899

between faux pas performance and social relations
resonate with the evidence from LeMare and Rubin
(1987) that peer sociability is linked with the ability
to take the perspective of an uninformed bystander
when interpreting the emotional behavior of a char-
acter who (unknown to the bystander) had experi-
enced a highly affectively charged situation. Our
research has the advantage of showing how reason-
ing about social situations involving emotions,
knowledge states, and intentions are linked longitu-
dinally with the quality of children’s peer group
functioning. In doing so, our study details the criti-
cal position of social relationships as a context for
the child’s construction of social understanding
(Carpendale & Lewis, 2004). Speciﬁcally, negative
peer
to inhibit children’s
emerging ability to track the details of complex
situations where people’s behavior has
social
consequences
feelings, and—
subsequently—difﬁculties in developing a mature
capacity to infer knowledge states and intentions in
these situations predict increasing peer rejection.

relationships appear

for each others’

We believe that at least two key issues need to be
considered in further analyses. First, investigations
of social understanding in the context of peer rela-
tions require measures that are suitably sensitive to
the kinds of mental-state reasoning that are
involved in children’s actual social
interactions.
Clearly, ﬁrst-order ToM tasks, such as the standard
false belief task, will be inadequate for explaining
individual differences
in typically developing
children’s social relationships beyond the age of 5
or 6 years. Furthermore, although standard ‘‘advan-
ced’’ ToM tasks, such as measures of second-order
false belief understanding (Perner & Wimmer, 1985;
Sullivan et al., 1994) have been shown to relate to
various other measures of social reasoning such as
the understanding of self-presentation and social
emotions (e.g., Banerjee & Yuill, 1999; Bennett &
Matthews, 2000; see also review by Miller, 2009),
they may not be adequate to capture the mental-
state reasoning involved in everyday peer interac-
tions. Indeed, Peterson, Garnett, Kelly, and Attwood
(2009) have recently shown that even those autistic
children who pass laboratory ToM tasks typically
were rated as poorer on ‘‘everyday mindreading’’
(social and conversational skills requiring mental-
state reasoning). Thus, more naturalistic measures
of the speciﬁc mental-state reasoning skills required
for ‘‘everyday mindreading’’—probably including
tasks such as faux pas understanding but also tasks
measuring the comprehension of irony, sarcasm,
and complex emotions (e.g., Channon, Pellijeff, &
Rule, 2005; Happe´, 1993; Heerey, Keltner, & Capps,

1900 Banerjee, Watling, and Caputi

2003; Ozonoff, Pennington, & Rogers, 1991)—are a
critical requirement for future research.

subsequent

A second issue of importance concerns the devel-
opmental timing of the associations between peer
relations and social understanding. In the present
study, we observed that peer rejection was an ante-
cedent of
faux pas understanding
between 7 and 10 years of age, when mean-level
performance on the faux pas task was steadily ris-
ing. However, between 10 and 11 years, when faux
pas scores in general appeared to have ﬂattened
out, peer rejection emerged as a longitudinal con-
sequence of having relatively low faux pas scores.
Thus, the nature of the association between social
relationships and social understanding is likely to
vary depending on the age of the participants and
the normative developmental
trajectory for the
given measure of social understanding. For exam-
ple, as we have seen above, parents’ interactions
with their young children can provide particularly
fertile soil from which social understanding can
grow and mature, insofar as features such as men-
tal-state talk can facilitate and accelerate the devel-
opment of mentalizing skills (e.g., Ruffman et al.,
2002). On the other hand, we suggest that individ-
ual differences in a given mentalizing skill may
come to play a more prominent role in inﬂuencing
peer group processes once most children have mas-
tered that skill: At that point, the relevant social
understanding may become an important founda-
tion for successful peer group interaction and those
who lack that understanding may therefore be
‘‘unable to enter deeply into peer
relations’’
(Slaughter et al., 2002, p. 560).

Bringing together both of the points above is the
possibility that different social understanding tasks
may have varying importance at different ages. Just
as we noted that standard false belief tasks cannot
explain variance in peer relations during middle
childhood, we must also observe that the faux pas
task does not explain variance in peer relations
during early childhood. This raises key questions
about which dimensions of social understanding
are linked to interpersonal relations during differ-
ent periods of a child’s development.
In fact,
research over the past 25 years has revealed a
remarkable array of developmental accomplish-
ments in social understanding from toddlerhood to
adolescence,
including—apart from the faux pas
reasoning studied here—capacities for understand-
ing pretence, reasoning about desires, recognizing
emotions, understanding false belief, appreciating
interpretative
emotional
ambivalence, and knowing how to regulate emo-

explaining

diversity,

tional and cognitive states (see Carpendale &
Lewis, 2006). A systematic analysis of when, how,
and why these different accomplishments are
linked to social relationships is a critical challenge
for future research.

Limitations and Directions for Further Work

The present study has a number of important
limitations that must be acknowledged and that
correspond with directions for further research.
First, we have relied on a single measure of social
understanding,
the faux pas task. Although we
believe there is good reason to view this as a valu-
able naturalistic measure of social understanding—
it has been successfully examined in connection
with a range of socially meaningful characteristics
(e.g., social anxiety, Banerjee & Henderson, 2001;
autistic spectrum disorders, Baron-Cohen et al.,
1999; frontal lobe lesions, Stone, Baron-Cohen, &
Knight, 1998)—further work using a wider range of
tasks, tapping different features of social under-
is required to substantiate the claims
standing,
made above about
links between
social understanding and peer relations.

the reciprocal

Second, the potential contributions of cognitive
and verbal ability to children’s social understand-
ing are not sufﬁciently clear. In the present study,
we controlled for a basic measure of receptive
vocabulary—which was indeed associated with
performance on the faux pas task—but it seems
plausible that other dimensions of cognition and
language may have important roles to play (e.g.,
semantic dimensions, Milligan, Astington, & Dack,
2007; syntax, Ruffman, Slade, Rowlandson, Rum-
sey, & Garnham, 2003; Smith, Apperly, & White,
2003; executive function, Blair, Zelazo, & Green-
berg, 2005; Carlson & Moses, 2001; Hughes, 1998).

concerns

Third, it is important to stress that there may
be unmeasured variables that contribute to the
relation between the faux pas and peer relations
scores. Even though social understanding is obvi-
ously and immediately relevant to children’s peer
interactions, it seems plausible that other variables
play a role in inﬂuencing each of these. One key
area
children’s motivation. Wentzel
(1996), for example, reports on research connecting
children’s social goals with their academic atti-
tudes, goals, and achievements. It seems highly
plausible that broad motivational orientations con-
cerning dimensions such as peer afﬁliation will
also give rise to different responses to the kinds of
scenarios and questions presented in the faux pas
task. However, we must recognize that those dif-

ferences in goal orientation and motivation them-
selves are likely to stem from variations in chil-
dren’s social experiences. Indeed, aspects of family
functioning discussed earlier (e.g., Meins et al.,
2002; Ruffman et al., 2002) will almost certainly
have independent as well as causally connected
effects on both interpersonal
functioning and
social understanding. Future research that com-
bines assessment of family and peer contexts will
therefore be invaluable for identifying the poten-
tial additive and interactive effects of these social
environments.

Fourth, a major direction for further research
concerns the mediating mechanisms that explain
the observed longitudinal associations between
social understanding and peer
relations. With
regard to the potential inhibition of social-cogni-
tive development caused by peer rejection, we
have suggested above that constrained opportuni-
ties to engage in positive social
interactions are
likely to hinder learning about complex social sit-
uations involving interplays of
intentions, emo-
tions, and beliefs. While this seems a plausible
line of argument, it is important to stress that we
do not have any direct measurements of the quan-
tity or quality of children’s social
interactions.
Research that provides such ﬁne-grained measure-
ments will be critical for understanding precisely
what aspects of peer rejection might lead to delays
or impairments in social understanding. For exam-
ple, it is not clear if there are differences in social
understanding between children who are rejected
because of aggressive behavior and children who
are rejected because of withdrawn behavior (see
Gifford-Smith & Brownell, 2003). On a related
point, further research should take into account
the subtle difference between friendlessness and
group exclusion; in fact, a mutual friendship could
potentially mitigate the negative effects of peer
rejection on mindreading abilities (Peterson & Si-
egal, 2002).

In a similar way, we need to understand more
about the speciﬁc social, emotional, and behavioral
features that mediate the relation between poor faux
pas scores and subsequently increased peer rejec-
tion, as observed among the 10- to 11-year-olds in
the present study. It seems possible that children
who do not have a sophisticated insight into the
interplay of mental states involved in the faux pas
situations are more likely to react inappropriately to
these situations in their social life; such responses, in
turn, could lead to a more negative peer reputation
and ultimately to greater rejection. However, this is
an empirical question that demands multi-informant

Peer Relations Faux Pas

1901

assessment of behavior and further longitudinal
analysis of meditational models.

serve

as

that

antecedents

Thus, gaining insight into the subtle connections
between social understanding and peer relations is
likely to depend on the use of a variety of different
methodologies in future research. Pepler and Craig
(2005), for example, point to the richness of data that
can be derived from observation of peer interac-
tions, both in naturalistic and structured settings.
Adding such work to the knowledge gained from
sociometric analysis, one can potentially determine
the speciﬁc aspects of peer group functioning and
and ⁄ or
discourse
consequences of particular forms of social reason-
ing. This would help us to go beyond broad indexes
of acceptance and rejection in order to identify
which features of social interaction might contribute
to different aspects of faux pas understanding. In
addition, such a multimethod approach can help us
uncover the potential moderating role of gender in
the connection between peer relations and social
understanding. Although we found only a main
effect of gender on faux pas reasoning in the present
study, more detailed methodological approaches
to both peer relations and social understanding may
help us see how important gender-related differ-
ences in peer relationships (e.g., Benenson, Apos-
toleris, & Parnass, 1998) map onto distinctions
between boys and girls in their social reasoning, par-
ticularly concerning negative emotions (Banerjee,
Rieffe, Meerum Terwogt, Gerlein, & Voutsina,
2006).

Conclusion

In summary, the present study has for the ﬁrst
time revealed bidirectional links between peer rela-
tions and social understanding in schoolchildren
between the ages of 6 and 11 years. The results
indicate that active rejection by the peer group is
likely to hinder the understanding of faux pas, at a
time when such understanding is typically increas-
ing. In addition, difﬁculties in understanding faux
pas toward the end of primary school appear to
predict subsequently elevated peer rejection. These
developmental patterns not only underline the
importance of naturalistic measures of social under-
standing as both antecedents and consequences of
children’s interpersonal relationships but also show
that the nature of these longitudinal relationships
changes over time. Further research is needed to
identify the speciﬁc mechanisms that account for
the development of different aspects of social
understanding within the peer context.

1902 Banerjee, Watling, and Caputi

References

Adria´n, J. E., Clemente, R. A., & Villanueva, L. (2007).
Mothers’ use of cognitive state verbs in picture-book
reading and the development of children’s understand-
ing of mind: A longitudinal study. Child Development,
78, 1052–1067. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.01052.x

Asher, S. R., & Wheeler, V. A. (1985). Children’s loneliness:
A comparison of rejected and neglected peer status. Jour-
nal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 53, 500–505.

Badenes, L., Estevan, R. A., & Bacete, F. J. (2000). Theory
of mind and peer rejection at school. Social Development,
9, 271–283. doi:10.1111/1467-9507.00125

Banerjee, R. (2000). The development of an understanding
of modesty. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
18, 499–517.

Banerjee, R. (2002). Audience effects on self-presentation
in childhood. Social Development, 1, 487–507. doi:10.
1111/1467-9507.00212

Banerjee, R.

(2004). The role of social experience in
advanced social understanding. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 27, 97–98. doi:10.1017/S0140525X04230035

Banerjee, R. (2008). Social cognition and anxiety in chil-
dren. In C. Sharp, P. Fonagy, & I. Goodyer (Eds.), Social
cognition and developmental psychopathology (pp. 239–
269). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Banerjee, R., & Henderson, L. (2001). Social-cognitive fac-
tors in childhood social anxiety: A preliminary investi-
gation. Social Development, 10, 558–572. doi:10.1111/
1467-9507.00180

Banerjee, R., Rieffe, C., Meerum Terwogt, M., Gerlein, A.,
& Voutsina, M. (2006). Popular and rejected children’s
reasoning about negative emotions in social situations:
Interactions with gender. Social Development, 15, 418–
433. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9507.2006.00349.x

Banerjee, R., & Watling, D. (2005). Children’s understand-
ing of faux pas: Associations with peer relations. Hel-
lenic Journal of Psychology, 2, 27–45.

Banerjee, R., & Yuill, N. (1999). Children’s understanding
of self-presentational display rules: Associations with
mental-state understanding. British Journal of Develop-
mental Psychology, 17, 111–124. doi:10.1348/026151
099165186

Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An essay on autism

and theory of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Baron-Cohen, S., O’Riordan, M., Stone, V., Jones, R., &
Plaisted, K. (1999). Recognition of faux pas by normally
developing children and children with Asperger syn-
drome or high-functioning autism. Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders, 29, 407–418. doi:10.1023/
A:1023035012436

Benenson, J., Apostoleris, N., & Parnass, J. (1998). The
organization of children’s same-sex peer relationships.
New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 81,
5–23. doi:10.1002/cd.23219988103

Bennett, M., & Matthews, L. (2000). The role of second-
order belief-understanding and social
in
children’s self attributions of social emotions. Social
Development, 9, 126–130. doi:10.1111/1467-9507.00115

context

Blair, C., Zelazo, P. D., & Greenberg, M. T. (2005). The
measurement of executive function in early child-
hood. Developmental Neuropsychology,
561–571.
doi:10.1207/s15326942dn2802_1

28,

Bosacki, S., & Astington, J. W. (1999). Theory of mind in
preadolescence: Relations between social understand-
ing and social competence. Social Development, 8, 237–
255. doi:10.1111/1467-9507.00093

Buhs, E. S., & Ladd, G. W. (2001). Peer rejection in kin-
dergarten as an antecedent of young children’s school
adjustment: An examination of mediating processes.
Developmental Psychology, 37, 550–560. doi:10.1037//
0012-1649.37.4.550

Carlson, S. M., & Moses, L. J. (2001). Individual differ-
ences in inhibitory control and children’s theory of
mind. Child Development, 72, 1032–1053. doi:10.1111/
1467-8624.00333

Carpendale, J. I., & Chandler, M. (1996). On the distinction
between false belief understanding and subscribing to
an interpretive theory of mind. Child Development, 67,
1686–1706. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.1996.tb01821.x

Carpendale, J. I. M., & Lewis, C. (2004). Constructing an
understanding of mind: The development of children’s
social
interaction.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27, 79–151. doi:10.1017/
S0140525X04000032

understanding within

social

Carpendale, J. I. M., & Lewis, C. (2006). How children

develop social understanding. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.

Cassidy, K. W., Werner, R. S., Rourke, M., Zubernis, L. S.,
& Balaraman, G. (2003). The relationship between psy-
chological understanding and positive social behaviors.
Social Development,
198–221. doi:10.1111/1467-
9507.00229

12,

Chandler, M. J. (1973). Egocentrism and antisocial behav-
ior: The assessment and training of social perspective-
taking skills. Developmental Psychology, 9, 326–332.
doi:10.1037/h0034974

Chandler, M. (2001). Perspective taking in the aftermath
of theory–theory and the collapse of the social-role tak-
ing literature. In A. Tryphon & V. Vone`che (Eds.),
Working with Piaget: Essays in honour of Ba¨rbel Inhelder
(pp. 39–64). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.

Chandler, M., Greenspan, S., & Barenboim, C. (1974).
Assessment and training of role-taking and referential
communication skills in institutionalized emotionally
disturbed children. Developmental Psychology, 10, 546–
553. doi:10.1037/h0036735

Channon, S., Pellijeff, A., & Rule, A. (2005). Social cogni-
tion after head injury: Sarcasm and theory of mind.
Brain
doi:10.1016/
j.bandl.2004.09.002

Language,

and

93,

123–134.

Coie, J. D., & Dodge, K. A. (1983). Continuities and
changes in children’s social status: A ﬁve-year longitu-
dinal study. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 29, 261–281.

Coie, J. D., & Dodge, K. A. (1988). Multiple sources of
data on social behavior and social status in the school:
A cross-age comparison. Child Development, 59, 815–
829.

Cutting, A. L., & Dunn, J. (2006). Conversations with sib-
lings and with friends: Links between relationship
quality and social understanding. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology,
73–87. doi:10.1348/
026151005X70337

24,

Dahlgren, S., & Trillingsgaard, A. (1996). Theory of mind
in non-retarded children with autism and Asperger’s
syndrome. A research note. Journal of Child Psychology
and
doi:10.1111/j.1469-
7610.1996.tb01469.x

Psychiatry,

759–763.

37,

Dodge, K. A., Lansford, J. E., Burks, V. S., Bates, J. E.,
Pettit, G. S., Fontaine, R., et al. (2003). Peer rejection
and social information-processing factors in the devel-
opment of aggressive behavior problems in children.
Child Development,
374–393. doi:10.1111/1467-
8624.7402004

74,

Dodge, K. A., & Pettit, G. S. (2003). A biopsychosocial
model of the development of chronic conduct problems
in adolescence. Developmental Psychology, 39, 349–371.
doi:10.1037/0012-1649.39.2.349

Dunn, J. (1995). Children as psychologists: The later cor-
relates of individual differences in understanding of
emotions and other minds. Cognition and Emotion, 9,
187–201. doi:10.1080/02699939508409008

Dunn, J., Brown, J., & Beardsall, L. (1991). Family talk about
feeling states and children’s later understanding of oth-
ers’ emotions. Developmental Psychology, 27, 448–455.

Dunn, L. M., Dunn, L. M., Whetton, C., & Burley, J.
(1997). British Picture Vocabulary Scale II. Windsor, UK:
NFER-Nelson.

Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., & Spinrad, T. L. (2006). Proso-
cial development. In N. Eisenberg, W. Damon, & R. M.
Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology (6th ed., pp.
646–718). New York: Wiley.

Ensor, R., & Hughes, C. (2008). Content or connected-
ness? Mother–child talk and early social understand-
ing. Child Development, 79, 201–216. doi:10.1111/j.1
467-8624.2007.01120.x

Faulkner, D., & Miell, D. (1993). Settling into school: The
importance of early friendships for the development of
children’ social understanding and communicative
competence. International Journal of Early Years Educa-
tion, 1, 23–46. doi:10.1080/0966976930010104

Flavell, J. H. (2004). Theory-of-mind development: Retro-
spect and prospect. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 50, 274–
290. doi:10.1353/mpq.2004.0018

Flavell, J., Botkin, P., Fry, C., Wright, J., & Jarvis, D.
(1968). The development of role-taking and communication
skills in children. New York: Wiley.

Gifford-Smith, M. E., & Brownell, C. A. (2003). Childhood
peer relationships: Social acceptance, friendships, and
peer networks. Journal of School Psychology, 41, 235–284.
doi:10.1016/S0022-4405(03)00048-7

Happe´, F. G. E. (1993). Communicative competence and
theory of mind in autism: A test of relevance theory. Cog-
nition, 48, 101–119. doi:10.1016/0010-0277(93)90026-R

Happe´, F. G. E. (1994). An advanced test of theory of
thoughts

mind: Understanding of story characters’

Peer Relations Faux Pas

1903

and feelings by able autistic, mentally handicapped,
and normal children and adults. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders,
129–154. doi:10.1007/
BF02172093

24,

Happe´, F. G. E. (1995). The role of age and verbal ability
in the theory of mind task performance of subjects with
autism. Child Development, 66, 843–855. doi:10.1111/
j.1467-8624.1995.tb00909.x

Heerey, E. A., Keltner, D., & Capps, L. M. (2003). Making
sense of self-conscious emotion: Linking theory of
mind and emotion in children with autism. Emotion, 3,
394–400. doi:10.1037/1528-3542.3.4.394

Howes, C., & Matheson, C. C.

(1992). Sequences in
the development of competent play with peers: Social
and pretend play. Developmental Psychology, 28, 961–
974.

Hu, L. T., & Bentler, P. M. (1998). Fit indices in covari-
ance structure modeling: Sensitivity to underparame-
terized model misspeciﬁcation. Psychological Methods, 3,
424–453.

Hughes, C. (1998). Executive function in preschoolers:
Links with theory of mind and verbal ability. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 16, 233–253.

‘‘Pretend you didn’t
Hughes, C., & Dunn,
know’’: Preschoolers’
in
pretend play. Cognitive Development, 12, 477–497.
doi:10.1016/S0885-2014(97)90019-8

talk about mental states

(1997).

J.

Hughes, C., Lecce, S., & Wilson, C. (2007). ‘Do you know
what I want?’ Preschoolers’ talk about desires, thoughts
and feelings in their conversations with sibs and
friends.
330–350.
doi:10.1080/02699930600551691

Cognition

Emotion,

and

21,

Hughes, C., & Leekam, S. R. (2004). What are the links
between theory of mind and social relations? Review,
reﬂections and new directions for studies of typical
and atypical development. Social Development, 13, 590–
619. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9507.2004.00285.x

Ladd, G. W. (1999). Peer relationships and social compe-
tence during early and middle childhood. Annual
Review of Psychology, 50, 333–359. doi:10.1146/annurev.
psych.50.1.333

Ladd, G., Herald, S. L., & Kochel, K. P. (2006). School
readiness: Are there social prerequisites? Early Educa-
tion
115–150. doi:10.1207/
s15566935eed1701_6

and Development,

17,

Ladd, G. W., Herald-Brown, S. L., & Reiser, M. (2008).
the
Does chronic classroom peer rejection predict
development of
classroom participation
during the grade school years? Child Development, 79,
1001–1015. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2008.01172.x

children’s

Lalonde, C. E., & Chandler, M. J. (1995). False belief
understanding goes to school: On the social-emotional
consequences of coming early or late to a ﬁrst theory of
mind. Cognition and Emotion, 9, 167–185. doi:10.1080/
02699939508409007

LeMare, L. J., & Rubin, K. H. (1987). Perspective taking
and peer interaction: Structural and developmental
analyses. Child Development, 58, 306–315.

1904 Banerjee, Watling, and Caputi

Lillard, A. (1993). Pretend play skills and the child’s the-
348–371.

of mind. Child Development,

ory
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.1993.tb02914.x

64,

Maguire, M. C., & Dunn, J. (1997). Friendships in early
childhood, and social understanding. International Jour-
nal of Behavioral Development, 21, 669–686. doi:10.1080/
016502597384613

McAlister, A., & Peterson, C. (2007). A longitudinal study
of child siblings and theory of mind development. Cog-
nitive Development,
258–270. doi:10.1016/j.cog-
dev.2006.10.009

22,

Meins, E., Fernyhough, C., Wainwright, R., Das Gupta,
M. D., Fradley, E., & Tuckey, M.
(2002). Maternal
mind-mindedness and attachment security as predic-
tors of theory of mind understanding. Child Develop-
ment, 73, 1715–1726. doi:10.1111/1467-8624.00501

Miller, S. A. (2009). Children’s understanding of second-
order mental states. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 749–773.
doi:10.1037/a0016854

Milligan, K., Astington, J. W., & Dack, L. A. (2007). Lan-
guage and theory of mind: Meta-analysis of the relation
between language ability and false-belief understand-
ing. Child Development, 78, 622–646. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
8624.2007.01018.x

Newcomb, A. F., Bukowski, W. M., & Pattee, L. (1993).
Children’s peer relations: A meta-analytic review of
popular, rejected, neglected, controversial, and average
sociometric status. Psychological Bulletin, 113, 99–128.

Ozonoff, S., Pennington, B., & Rogers, S. J. (1991). Execu-
tive function deﬁcits in high-functioning autistic indi-
viduals: Relationship to theory of mind. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 32, 1081–1105. doi:10.1111/
j.1469-7610.1991.tb00351.x

Parker, J. G., & Gottman, J. M. (1989). Social and emo-
tional development
in a relational context. In J. T.
Berndt & G. W. Ladd (Eds.), Peer relationships in child
development (pp. 95–131). New York: Wiley.

Pears, K. C., & Moses, L. J. (2003). Demographics, parent-
ing, and theory of mind in preschool children. Social
Development, 12, 1–20. doi:10.1111/1467-9507.00219

Pepler, D. J., & Craig, W. M. (1998). Assessing children’s
peer relationships. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 3,
176–182. doi:10.1111/1475-3588.00238

Pepler, D. J., & Craig, W. M. (2005). Aggressive girls on trou-
bled trajectories: A developmental perspective. In D. J.
Pepler, K. C. Madsen, C. Webster, & K. S. Levene (Eds.),
The development and treatment of girlhood aggression (pp. 3–28).
Mahwah, NJ: Earlbaum.

Perner, J., & Wimmer, H. (1985). ‘‘John thinks that Mary
thinks that y’’: Attribution of second-order beliefs by 5-
to 10-year-old children. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology,
437–471. doi:10.1016/0022-0965(85)
90051-7

39,

Peterson, C. C., Garnett, M., Kelly, A., & Attwood, T.
(2009). Everyday social and conversation applications
theory-of-mind understanding by children with
of
autism-spectrum disorders or
typical development.

European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 18, 105–115.
doi:10.1007/s00787-008-0711-y

Peterson, C. C., & Siegal, M. (2002). Mindreading and
moral awareness in popular and rejected preschool-
ers. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 20,
205–224.

Peterson, C. C., & Slaughter, V. (2003). Opening windows
into the mind: Mothers’ preferences for mental state
explanations and children’s theory of mind. Cognitive
Development, 18, 399–429. doi:10.1016/S0885-2014(03)
00041-8

Piaget, J. (1932). The moral judgement of the child, London:

Kegan Paul.

Renouf, A., Brendgen, M., Parent, S., Vitaro, F., Zelazo,
P., Boivin, M., et al. (2010). Relations between theory of
mind and indirect and physical aggression in kinder-
garten: Evidence of the moderating role of prosocial
behaviors. Social Development, 19, 535–555. doi:10.1111/
j.1467-9507.2009.00552.x

Repacholi, B. M., & Slaughter, V. (Eds.). (2003). Individual
differences in theory of mind. New York: Psychology
Press.

Rose-Krasnor, L. (1997). The nature of social competence:
A theoretical review. Social Development, 6, 111–135.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9507.1997.tb00097.x

Rubin, K. H., Bukowski, W. M., & Parker, J. G. (2006). Peer
interactions, relationships, and groups. In N. Eisenberg,
W. Damon, & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psy-
chology (6th ed., pp. 571–645). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Ruffman, T., Perner, J., Naito, M., Parkin, L., & Clements,
W. A. (1998). Older (but not younger) siblings facilitate
false belief understanding. Developmental Psychology, 34,
161–174.

Ruffman, T., Perner, J., & Parkin, L. (1999). How parent-
ing style affects false belief understanding. Social Devel-
opment, 8, 395–411. doi:10.1111/1467-9507.00103

Ruffman, T., Slade, L., & Crowe, E. (2002). The relation
between children’s and mothers’ mental state language
and theory-of-mind understanding. Child Development,
73, 734–751. doi:10.1111/1467-8624.00435

Ruffman, T., Slade, L., Rowlandson, K., Rumsey, C., &
Garnham, A. (2003). How language relates to belief,
desire, and emotion understanding. Cognitive Develop-
ment, 18, 139–158. doi:10.1016/S0885-2014(03)00002-9

Selman, R. L. (1976). Social-cognitive understanding: A
guide to educational and clinical practice. In T. Licko-
nia (Ed.), Moral development
and behavior: Theory,
research, and social issues (pp. 299–316). New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.

Selman, R. L. (1980). The growth of interpersonal understand-

ing. New York: Academic Press.

Selman, R. L., Beardslee, W., Schultz, L. H., Krupa, M.,
& Podorefsky, D.
adolescent
interpersonal negotiation strategies: Toward the inte-
gration of structural and functional models. Develop-
mental Psychology, 22, 450–459. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.
22.4.450

(1986). Assessing

Slaughter, V., Dennis, M., & Pritchard, M. (2002). Theory
of mind and peer acceptance in preschoolers. British
Journal
545–564.
doi:10.1348/026151002760390945

of Developmental Psychology,

20,

Slomkowski, C., & Dunn, J. (1996). Young children’s
understanding of other people’s beliefs and feelings
and their connected communication with friends.
Developmental Psychology, 32, 442–447.

Smith, M., Apperly, I. A., & White, V. (2003). False belief
reasoning and the acquisition of relative clause sen-
tences. Child Development, 74, 1709–1719. doi:10.1046/
j.1467-8624.2003.00633.x

Stone, V. E., Baron-Cohen, S., & Knight, R. T. (1998).
Frontal lobe contributions to theory of mind. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience,
640–656. doi:10.1162/
089892998562942

10,

Sutton, J., Smith, P., & Swettenham, J. (1999). Social cog-
inadequacy or skilled
nition and bullying: Social
manipulation? British Journal of Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 17, 435–450. doi:10.1348/026151099165384

Sullivan, K., Zaitchik, D., & Tager-Flusberg, H. (1994).
Preschoolers can attribute second-order beliefs. Devel-
opmental Psychology, 30, 395–402.

Taylor, M., & Carlson, S. M. (1997). The relation between
individual differences in fantasy and theory of mind.
Child Development, 68, 436–455. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
8624.1997.tb01950.x

Vernberg, E. M., Ewell, K. K., Beery, S. H., & Abwender,
D. A. (1994). Sophistication of adolescents’
interper-
sonal negotiation strategies and friendship formation
after relocation: A naturally occurring experiment. Jour-
nal of Research on Adolescence, 4, 5–19. doi:10.1207/
s15327795jra0401_2

Walker, S. (2005). Gender differences in the relationship
between young children’s peer-related social compe-
tence and individual differences in theory of mind.
Journal of Genetic Psychology, 166, 297–312. doi:10.3200/
GNTP.166.3.297-312

Watson, A. C., Nixon, C. L., Wilson, A., & Capage, L.
(1999). Social interaction skills and theory of mind in
young children. Developmental Psychology, 35, 386–391.

Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-
theory-of-mind development: The truth
false belief. Child Development, 72, 655–684.

analysis of
about
doi:10.1111/1467-8624.00304

Wentzel, K. (1996). Motivation in context: Social relation-
ships and achievement in middle school. In J. Juvonen
& K. Wentzel (Eds.), Social motivation: Understanding

Peer Relations Faux Pas

1905

children’s school adjustment (pp. 226–247). New York:
Cambridge University Press.

Youngblade, L. M., & Dunn, J. (1995). Individual differ-
ences in young children’s pretend play with mother and
sibling: Links to relationships and understanding of
other people’s feelings and beliefs. Child Development, 66,
1472–1492. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.1995.tb00946.x

Zerwas, S., Balaraman, G., & Brownell, C. (2004). Con-
structing an understanding of mind with peers. Behav-
ioral
130. doi:10.1017/
S0140525X04590039

and Brain

Sciences,

27,

Appendix

Sample story, questions, and response options

Nick has painted a picture of a rocket for a class
exhibition. Nick’s friend, Peter, is in another class,
but he comes to see the exhibition after school.
Peter points to Nick’s picture and says, ‘‘The rest of
the paintings are quite nice, but this rocket picture
is dreadful, isn’t it?’’ Nick says, ‘‘Oh, I need to go
home now.’’

Detection. In the story, did someone say some-

thing they should not have said? [Yes OR No]

Identiﬁcation. What was said that should not have
been said? [Nick said, ‘‘I need to go home now’’
OR Peter said, ‘‘This rocket picture is dreadful’’]

Feelings. How does Nick feel now? [Sad OR

Pleased]

Intention. Did Peter want to make Nick upset?

[Yes OR No]

Comprehension. Who painted the rocket picture?

[Nick painted it OR Someone else painted it]

Ignorance. Did Peter know that Nick had painted

the rocket picture? [Yes OR No]

Content of other scenarios

One character says curtains are horrible to person

who has just bought them.

One character says he hates apple pie to cousin

who has just made one.

One character is negative about violins to friend

who has just started violin lessons.

<<<<<<< HEAD

The ENd of Document.
=======

>>>>>>> 4b6d83505f38ee99db288849a2c8b69a8d07c211
