Developmental Science 2017; 20: e12447

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12447

PAPER

Action mechanisms for social cognition: behavioral and neural
correlates of developing Theory of Mind

Lindsay C. Bowman,1 Samuel G. Thorpe,2 Erin N. Cannon2 and
Nathan A. Fox2

1. Harvard Medical School, Boston Children’s Hospital, USA
2. Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of Maryland, USA

Abstract

Many psychological theories posit foundational links between two fundamental constructs: (1) our ability to produce, perceive,
and represent action; and (2) our ability to understand the meaning and motivation behind the action (i.e. Theory of Mind;
ToM). This position is contentious, however, and long-standing competing theories of social-cognitive development debate roles
for basic action-processing in ToM. Developmental research is key to investigating these hypotheses, but whether individual
differences in neural and behavioral measures of motor action relate to social-cognitive development is unknown. We examined
3- to 5-year-old children’s (N = 26) EEG mu-desynchronization during production of object-directed action, and explored
associations between mu-desynchronization and children’s behavioral motor skills, behavioral action-representation abilities,
and behavioral ToM. For children with high (but not low) mu-desynchronization, motor skill related to action-representation
abilities, and action-representation mediated relations between motor skill and ToM. Results demonstrate novel foundational
links between action-processing and ToM, suggesting that basic motor action may be a key mechanism for social-cognitive
development, thus shedding light on the origins and emergence of higher social cognition.

Research highlights

Introduction

(cid:129) We provide evidence that individual differences in
children’s explicit ToM relate to individual differ-
ences in neural and behavioral measures of basic
action, demonstrating novel links between action and
social cognition. Specifically, when neural systems
supporting action-processing are highly integrated,
children’s action-representation abilities mediate
relations between their basic action-production skills
and ToM.

(cid:129) Whether/how neural systems underlying action sup-
port higher social cognition is controversial and
debated across many fields. Results help clarify
functions of the mu-rhythm – a measure commonly
used to investigate neural systems supporting action
– and shed light on the origins and course of social-
cognitive development.

Theory of Mind (ToM) – understanding that internal
mental states such as beliefs, desires,
intentions, and
knowledge motivate outward action and interaction – is
a cornerstone of social cognition, and has been the focus
of decades of research across a remarkable breadth of
fields. Yet, core questions about factors and processes
supporting ToM and its development are debated, and
remain unclear. In a comprehensive examination of ToM
development in early childhood, the present study brings
together measures of executive functioning (EF) and
verbal intelligence (long-established correlates of ToM;
see Devine & Hughes, 2014; Milligan, Astington &
Dack, 2007, for meta-analyses) with measures of basic
motor action. We demonstrate novel foundational links
between individual differences in ToM and both behav-
ioral and neural measures of action – beyond influence

Address for correspondence: Lindsay C. Bowman, Center for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis, 267 Cousteau Place, Davis, CA 95618,
USA; e-mail: lcbowman@ucdavis.edu

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

2 of 16 Lindsay C. Bowman et al.

of EF and verbal intelligence – to shed new light on
potential origins and developmental mechanisms of
higher social cognition.

Theoretical links between action-processing and ToM

Theories in both classic and current literature posit links
between action and ToM. Despite some differences, they
converge on the position that the neural and/or mental
processes involved in planning, executing, and perceiving
basic bodily movements – referred to broadly in this
manuscript as ‘action processes’ or ‘action-processing’ –
contribute to understanding mental states.

To illustrate, several positions emphasize the role of
internal representation of action in developing mental-
state understanding. We define action-representation as
the internal mental process of recreating some semblance
of a perceived or executed action, in the absence of any
real-time perception or execution. Some researchers argue
that mental-state understanding evolved from a neural
system for detecting and representing actions (Blakemore
& Decety, 2001; Frith & Frith, 1999). In addition,
proponents of
‘simulation’ accounts of mental-state
understanding posit that others’ actions are mapped onto
internal representations – or simulations – of one’s own
actions. It is hypothesized that these simulations, by way
of connection to one’s own mental states, can then guide
inference about the mental states motivating others’
actions (e.g. Goldman, 1992; Gordon, 1996; Decety &
Grezes, 2006; Gallese & Sinigaglia, 2011).

Other theoretical positions linking action-processes
and ToM emphasize an additional component beyond
action-perception and action-representation: action-pro-
duction – defined here as the execution of one’s own
actions. Hunnius and Bekkering (2014) argue that
infants’ action-production experience provides multi-
faceted representations of actions and their conse-
quences, which lead to associations between actions
and outcomes that can then be used to understand and
predict others’ actions. Woodward (2013; Woodward &
Gerson, 2014) also argues that infants’ action-represen-
tations are derived from action-production, and that
together action-production and representation support
developing understanding of the intentions and goals
motivating action, particularly when infants experience
their own and others’ goal-directed actions in co-
occurrence. These ideas are echoed by Meltzoff (e.g.
2002, 2007, 2013) who proposes that ToM is jump-
started through (1)
initial detection of equivalences
between perceived and produced actions, (2) develop-
ments in producing one’s own actions as motivated by
one’s own mental states, and (3) the ability to represent
others’ actions similarly to one’s own. In brief, when

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

infants see others acting ‘like me’ (i.e. like the infant
themself), they project that others have mental experi-
ences also like their own. Theories of ‘embodied social
cognition’ highlight similar themes and posit that social
understanding arises from the production and mutual
perception of body actions and their outcomes (e.g.
Daum, Sommerville & Prinz, 2009).

However, these theoretical positions require substan-
tiation with empirical research, especially considering
that not all theories of ToM development emphasize a
foundational role of basic action-processing. Indeed,
other theories emphasize, for example, innate cortical
modules dedicated specifically to mental-state reasoning
(e.g. Scholl & Leslie, 1999), or na€ıve conceptual theories
of how and why humans generally behave the way they
do (e.g. Gopnik & Wellman, 1992, 2012), or advance-
ments in general EF and inhibitory control (e.g. Carlson
& Moses, 2001; Devine & Hughes, 2014) as alternative
mechanisms supporting ToM development. Empirical
research is therefore critical
to substantiate action-
processing as a key developmental construct that con-
tributes to ToM development.

Behavioral relations between action-processing and
ToM

Behavioral research in infancy provides some support for
theories linking the emergence of mental-state under-
standing to action-processing (see Hunnius & Bekkering,
2014; Woodward, 2013, for reviews). Indeed,
infants’
action-production experience is associated with under-
standing the goals and intentions behind others’ actions
(e.g. Ambrosini, Reddy, de Looper, Costantini, Lopez
et al., 2013; Brune & Woodward, 2007; Cannon, Wood-
ward, Gredeb€ack, von Hofsten & Turek, 2012; Wood-
ward & Guajardo, 2002; Kanakogi & Itakura, 2011;
Gerson & Woodward, 2014; Sommerville, Hildebrand &
Crane, 2008; Sommerville, Woodward & Needham,
2005). However, relations between action-processing
and detection of intentions and goals in infancy do not
provide clear evidence that action-processing facilitates
development of the complex mental-state understanding
characteristic of ToM. Developments
in children’s
explicit understanding (i.e. as measured with pointing
or verbal response) of beliefs, desires, knowledge, and
emotions are manifest
in the preschool years, over
roughly 3 to 5 years old (Wellman, Cross & Watson,
2001; Wellman & Liu, 2004). Thus, investigating how
behavioral developments in action-processing relate to
preschoolers’ developments in these advanced, explicit
mental-state understandings is needed to provide direct
evidence that action-processing contributes to develop-
ing higher social cognition and a fully-fledged ToM.

Mu-rhythm as a neural mechanism for linking
action-processing with ToM development

(e.g. voluntary hand movement)

A specific neural mechanism facilitating links between
action and ToM, present in early life, would further
support the notion that action-processing is important
for ToM development. One possible neural mechanism
may be captured in the electroencephalogram (EEG) mu-
rhythm. In both adults and infants/children, mu-rhythm
reflects EEG oscillations in ‘alpha’ frequency bands
(~8–13 Hz in adults, ~6–9 Hz in infants/children) that
desynchronize (i.e. decrease in spectral power relative to a
resting/baseline period) during an action-production
event
(Muthuku-
maraswamy & Johnson 2004; Pfurtscheller, Neuper,
Andrew & Edlinger, 1997). The analyses used to identify
mu-rhythm are often referred to as event-related desyn-
chronization (ERD) analyses. For mu-rhythm, desyn-
chronization often occurs maximally over central scalp
locations overlying sensorimotor cortex (Kuhlman,
1978), suggesting that it may index sensorimotor cortical
activation (e.g. Leocani, Toro, Manganotti, Zhuang &
Hallett, 1997; Toro, Deuschl, Thatcher, Sato, Kufta
et al., 1994). Indeed, source localization studies have
identified source estimates of mu-rhythm concentrated in
sensorimotor areas (Hari, Salmelin, M€akel€a, Salenius &
Helle, 1997; Salmelin & Hari, 1994a, 1994b; Thorpe,
Cannon & Fox, 2016).

Though most robustly defined during action-produc-
tion, mu-desynchronization also occurs during action-
perception (see Fox, Bakermans-Kranenburg, Yoo, Bow-
man, Cannon et al., 2016, for meta-analysis; Marshall &
Meltzoff, 2011). Given these dual properties, some
researchers
reason that mu-rhythm reflects activity
associated with not only producing action, but also
internally representing action in the absence of produc-
tion (Muthukumaraswamy & Johnson, 2004; Lepage &
Theoret, 2006; Marshall & Meltzoff, 2011). Given that
both action-production and action-representation have
been posited to support development of mental-state
understanding as outlined above (e.g. Meltzoff, 2002;
Woodward, 2013; Decety & Grezes, 2006), it is possible
that a neural system supporting both of these functions
could constitute a specific neural mechanism facilitating
links between action-processing and ToM (see e.g.
Marshall & Meltzoff, 2011, 2014).

Two sets of evidence are needed to support this
possibility: (1) evidence that mu-desynchronization is
associated with both action-production and action-
representation in early life, and (2) evidence that mu-
desynchronization is associated with ToM. There is some
initial indirect support for this first set of evidence (see
Cuevas, Cannon, Yoo & Fox, 2014; Marshall & Meltzoff,

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Action mechanisms for social cognition 3 of 16

2011, 2014, for reviews). Specifically, infants’ mu-desyn-
chronization is clearly associated with action-production.
It occurs when infants produce object-directed grasps (e.g.
Southgate, Johnson, Osborne & Csibra, 2009; Marshall,
Young & Meltzoff, 2011), and the magnitude of mu-
desynchronization during infants’ action-perception
relates to their experience or proficiency in action-
production (Cannon, Simpson, Fox, Vanderwert, Wood-
ward et al., 2016; Gerson, Bekkering & Hunnius, 2015;
Upshaw, Bernier & Sommerville, 2016; Van Elk, van
Schie, Hunnius, Vesper & Bekkering, 2008; Virji-Babul,
Rose, Moiseeva & Makan, 2012; Warreyn, Ruysschaert,
Wiesema, Handl, Pattyn et al., 2013). Some evidence
suggests that mu-rhythm may also be somatatopically
organized by 14 months of age (Marshall, Saby &
Meltzoff, 2013; Saby, Meltzoff & Marshall 2013).

Support for associations between mu-desynchroniza-
tion and action-representation comes from findings that,
similar to action-production, infants’ mu-rhythm desyn-
chronizes during mere perception of action, both in
visual and auditory domains (e.g. Southgate et al., 2009;
Marshall et al., 2011, during visual action perception;
Gerson et al., 2015; Paulus, Hunnius, van Elk &
Bekkering, 2012, during auditory perception of action-
related sounds). This similar desynchronization across
production and perception conditions has led researchers
to argue that mu-desynchronization during action-
perception reflects activation of the same sensorimotor
neural system supporting action-production, and thus
mu-rhythm indexes cortical representation of sensorimo-
tor action even in the absence of actual production
(Muthukumaraswamy & Johnson, 2004; Lepage &
Theoret, 2006). In brief, a common conceptualization
of mu-rhythm is that it reflects activity of a single
sensorimotor neural system that is activated during both
action-production and action-representation.

However, the idea that mu-desynchronization during
action-perception reflects internal representation of sen-
sorimotor action is difficult to verify because it rests on
the assumption that the similarity in mu-desynchroniza-
tion across production and perception conditions indi-
cates activation of precisely the same sensorimotor
neural system. This assumption is potentially problem-
atic given that signals emanating from their source
neural populations are volume conducted to the scalp
surface, and thus spatial resolution of the EEG is low.
Moreover, other conceptualizations of mu-rhythm posit
that it reflects a dynamic, integrated system in which
multiple neural networks of different
functions are
coupled and entrained (Pineda, 2005; Thorpe et al.,
2016), and researchers caution against an exclusive
(Marshall &
emphasis on sensorimotor

functions

4 of 16 Lindsay C. Bowman et al.

Meltzoff, 2014). Thus, global similarities in mu-rhythm
desynchronization across action-production and action-
perception conditions may not necessarily reflect activa-
tion of precisely the same parts of a potentially more
complex underlying neural network. Further clarity on
mu-rhythm function is needed.

More generally, investigations of infant mu-rhythm do
not necessarily translate to an understanding of mu-
rhythm function in early childhood, when key advance-
ments in explicit ToM are manifest (Wellman et al.,
2001; Wellman & Liu, 2004). To date there is no direct
evidence examining relations between mu-rhythm and
explicit ToM in preschool children. These examinations
are critical for investigating whether mu-rhythm and
action-processing (i.e. production and/or representation
processes) may serve as a neural mechanism facilitating
ToM development.

The present study

in 3-

The present study aims to shed light on links between
ToM and action-processing, and the possibility that mu-
rhythm reflects a neural mechanism supporting this link.
We examined relations between individual differences in
ToM, and neural and behavioral measures of action-
processing,
to 5-year-old typically developing
children. Guided by existing theories that posit both
action-production and action-representation as core
features supporting social-cognitive development (e.g.
Meltzoff, 2002; 2013; Woodward, 2013; Decety &
Grezes, 2006), we assessed children’s behavioral skills
in producing simple motor acts (using the motor skill
test from the Movement Assessment Battery for Chil-
dren; MABC; Henderson & Sugden, 1992), as well as
their action-representation skills (using a novel task
requiring mental representation of object-directed hand
actions in the absence of either direct perception or
production of action). We also assessed explicit ToM
reasoning (using the Wellman & Liu, 2004, ToM scale
and standard location-change false-belief tasks; Wimmer
& Perner, 1983). In addition to these behavioral mea-
sures, we recorded children’s EEG activity during
perception and production of simple object-directed
grasping actions, to examine mu-desynchronization. This
battery of assessments was designed to address several
outstanding issues that currently create difficulty in
evaluating links between ToM and action-processing.

First, behavioral measures of action-processes can
help clarify mu-rhythm function, and in particular its
hypothesized association with action-representation per
se. Clarity on mu-rhythm function has
important
implications for the field more broadly, and is central
to the present study given the hypothesized role of

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

action-representation in ToM development (e.g. Wood-
ward, 2013; Meltzoff, 2002; Decety & Grezes, 2006) and
the possibility that mu-rhythm reflects a neural mech-
anism facilitating links between action-processes and
ToM. The addition of behavioral measures side-steps the
issue of interpreting similarities in the EEG signal across
action-production and action-perception conditions
(which can be difficult to verify given volume conduction
and low spatial resolution of ERD analyses). Specifi-
cally, mu-desynchronization in a single condition can be
correlated with behavioral measures of both action-
production and action-representation, as well as with
other cognitive-behavioral measures (e.g. ToM, EF), to
reveal potentially complex relations among neural and
behavioral action constructs that may not be detectable
in the EEG alone.

To guide our hypotheses for how mu-desynchronization
might relate to behavioral measures of action-production
and action-representation, we used a more complex
conceptualization of mu-rhythm function (given recent
caution against the conceptualization of mu-rhythm as
reflecting activity in a single sensorimotor system; e.g.
Marshall & Meltzoff, 2014). This more complex concep-
tualization posits that mu-rhythm reflects a dynamic and
integrative network in which multiple neural systems of
different specialized functions are interconnected (Pineda,
2005; Thorpe et al., 2016). We hypothesized that individ-
ual differences in mu-desynchronization may therefore
reflect the extent to which systems supporting action-
production and action-representation are interconnected
into a common integrated network. Support for this
‘integrated network’ conceptualization would come from
finding that mu-desynchronization moderates the relation
between action-production and action-representation,
rather than correlating directly with either construct (as
would be predicted by the simplified ‘single sensorimotor
system’ conceptualization).

Second, we examined relations between individual
differences in ToM, and behavioral measures of action-
production and action-representation. This examination
provides the first direct assessment of links between
action-processing and the explicit mental-state under-
standing evident in preschool years. We hypothesized
that ToM performance would correlate with action-
representation, but not necessarily with action-produc-
tion. In infancy, intention-understanding is associated
with acquisition of entirely new motor production skills
(e.g. Sommerville et al., 2005), whereas individual dif-
ferences in the fine-tuning of existing motor skills
measured in early childhood (Manoel & Conolly, 1998)
may not directly relate to ToM performance.

Third, to shed light on the possibility that mu-rhythm
reflects a neural mechanism supporting links between

ToM and action-processing, we explored relations
between individual differences in mu-desynchronization
and children’s ToM performance to gain insight into
how such a neural mechanism may facilitate links
between action and mental-state understanding.

Finally, to assess unique relations between behavioral
and neural action constructs and ToM specifically, we also
assessed children’s EF and verbal intelligence to use as
covariates in all analyses given robust associations
between ToM and each of these additional constructs
(see Devine & Hughes, 2014; Milligan et al., 2007, for
meta-analyses).

Methods

SD = 6.93,

Participants
Forty-four children 3 to 5 years old (22 males, Mage =
range = 45–68 months)
55.75 months,
underwent EEG recording and behavioral testing. One
child did not complete all behavioral tasks and was
excluded from behavioral analyses. Seventeen additional
children were excluded from EEG analyses: Three were
left-handed (our EEG task required grasping toys with
right hand only), and 14 did not provide more than 50%
(i.e. ≥7/12 trials) useable (free of motion artifact) EEG
data (in line with commonly reported attrition rates of
20–45% in preschool data due to excessive motion
artifact; Bell & Cuevas, 2012) (see Supplemental Mate-
rial
for details on artifact detection and rejection
processes). Our final sample consisted of 26 children
(14 males, Mage = 55.98 months, SD = 7.42, range =
45–68 months; see Supplemental Material for detailed
sample demographics). All included children had normal
or corrected-to-normal vision, no history of neuropsy-
chological disorders or trauma, and were born within
3 weeks of their original due-date, by parental report.
Excluded children did not differ from included children
on any demographic or behavioral measures
(all
ps > .14).

Measures

Behavioral assessments

Behavioral tasks were administered after EEG recording
(see Table S1 for order). Descriptions of individual tasks
for the ToM and EF batteries can be found in supporting
information available online.

ToM battery. Diverse-desires, diverse-beliefs, knowl-
edge-access, contents false-belief and explicit false-belief

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Action mechanisms for social cognition 5 of 16

tasks from the Wellman and Liu (2004) scale were used,
supplemented by two changed-location false-belief tasks
(Wimmer & Perner, 1983). All tasks included warm-up
and/or control questions to ensure that children correctly
understood the task. Children received one point for
every task they passed,
thus higher scores indicate
greater ToM understanding.

(DCCS)

EF battery. Three EF tasks assessed cognitive flexibility
and conflict-inhibition. Children completed grass-snow
stroop (Carlson & Moses, 2001), dimensional-change
card-sort
(Zelazo, 2006), and less-is-more
(Carlson, Davis & Leach, 2005). All tasks included
warm-up and/or control questions to ensure that chil-
dren correctly understood the task. Scores were either
proportion/percent correct or sum correct on target, thus
higher scores indicate greater EF skills.

II

Intelligence Test

Kaufman Brief
(KBIT-2): Verbal
intelligence (Kaufman & Kaufman, 1990). The verbal
intelligence test from the KBIT-2 (Kaufman & Kauf-
man, 1990) required selecting the picture correctly
demonstrating a general fact or meaning of a target
word. Higher scores indicate greater verbal intelligence.

Motor skill task. The posting coins test of motor skill
(Henderson & Sugden, 1992) assessed children’s behav-
ioral action-execution ability. Children were timed as
they placed 12 coins as fast as they could into a slotted
box. Shorter times indicate greater motor coordination
and manual dexterity.

Action-representation task. This
task assessed chil-
dren’s ability to mentally represent different hand
positions and object-directed hand actions. Correct
responses on each trial required understanding how
both body orientation (orientation of
the hand in
relation to the object) and grasping position (relative
positions of fingers, palm, and wrist) should be opti-
mized to grasp differently shaped and oriented handles
(see Figure 1 for example stimulus). Critically, hand
positions/orientations and handles were shown as static
two-dimensional images. Thus, the task required repre-
sentation of action in the absence of either observation
or execution of action itself. For each item (eight total),
children were told to pick the hand that was best
shaped to grab the handle (only one option was
correct). Higher
indicate greater ability to
mentally represent hand actions in the absence of
action-execution or action-observation (see supporting
information for scoring details). All trials were vali-
dated on a sample of 10 adults (sample achieved 100%
accuracy).

scores

6 of 16 Lindsay C. Bowman et al.

Figure 1 Example trial stimulus for action-representation task.

EEG grasp task

Children’s EEG was recorded while they grasped a small
toy. Details of this task are also described in Thorpe
et al. (2016) in which EEG data from a subset of the
current sample were analyzed in a larger study, without
connection to behavioral data. Children sat in front of a
stage with an opaque curtain. The curtain was raised/
lowered at the onset/offset of each trial (~1.5 second
duration). Video-recording captured children’s grasping
behavior, coded to identify EEG associated with each
child’s exact point of grasping contact with the toy.
Trials consisted of a static baseline interval (3 seconds;
participants viewed black two-dimensional shapes on a
white background), followed by an execution interval
(ranged from 5 to 15 seconds depending on how quickly
the child reached; a hidden experimenter pushed the top
of the mobile stage towards the participant, and the
participant picked up the
toy). Participants were
instructed to pick up the toy with their right (dominant)
hand only (occasional
left-hand execution trials were
excluded from analyses).

Across trials, ten unique baseline shapes and toys
were presented in unique orders, randomized across
subjects. On 50% of trials (24 trials total), baseline was
(~ 4 seconds;
followed by an observation interval
participants viewed a live female experimenter grasp
a toy with her right hand); observation trials were
interspersed throughout
randomly across
participants, with the stipulation that the same interval
type (i.e. execution or observation) occurred no more
than twice consecutively. After every two to three
trials, children played with stickers to prevent fatigue
(average duration 1–2 minutes; five breaks total). The

the task,

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EEG net was not removed during breaks though no
EEG was recorded. Total duration of the task includ-
ing
approximately
20–30 minutes.

transitions was

breaks

and

Electrophysiological recording and analyses

EEG was recorded continuously at 500 Hz using a 64-
channel Hydrocel Geodesic Sensor Net
(Electrical
Geodesic Inc., Eugene, OR) – a network of 64 Ag⁄AgCl
electrodes embedded in an elastic geodesic tension
structure. Impedance for all electrodes was kept below
100 KΩ. Signals were referenced to the vertex (Cz)
during recording.

first

using

baseline-corrected,

Details of EEG processing and analytic procedures
can be found in Thorpe et al. (2016) (see also Supple-
mental Material). Continuous EEG data from each
participant were
linear-
detrended, and re-referenced to the average reference.
Artifacts associated with body movement were edited
using a thresholding procedure to remove high ampli-
tude waveforms. Blinks/eye movements and net displace-
ment over the front of the head were also identified and
rejected
analysis
(Hyv€arinen, 1999). EEG data were then reconstructed
in channel space from the remaining set of clean
components (components removed for each subject:
M = 8.14, SD = 1.67). After pre-processing and artifact
rejection, children on average contributed 10 trials
(SD = 1.09) of artifact-free EEG data for analyses. This
number is in line with current developmental studies on
mu-rhythm desynchronization (e.g. Cannon et al., 2016;
Yoo, Cannon, Thorpe & Fox, 2015), and with pediatric

independent

components

event-related desynchronization studies more generally
(e.g. Cuevas, Raj & Bell, 2012).

Segmentation and parameters for ERD analysis

two independent

Resultant data were segmented into epochs containing a
baseline interval (baseline/reference for ERD analyses)
and its corresponding (subsequent) grasping interval
(event of interest for ERD analyses) for both ‘observe
trials’ (experimenter grasps object) and ‘execute trials’
(child grasps object). The grasping interval was identified
for each trial from video recorded during task (coded
frame-by-frame by
coders who
achieved agreement within ~100 ms on 90% of trials)
and consisted of the 2-second interval centered on the
grasp-completion event
(i.e. point at which child’s/
experimenter’s hand first touched the toy in an act
resulting in a completed grasp), capturing 1 second pre
and post grasp. This interval reasonably captured both
the initiation of the voluntary grasping action from the
reach towards the object (approx. mean duration of
reach to point of grasp =
children’s
1.33 seconds, SD = 0.92) as well as the completion of
the voluntary grasping action ending with picking the
object up off the table and retracting it towards the body
(approx. mean duration of children’s point of grasp to
completed retraction towards body = 1.34 seconds,
SD = 0.83). The baseline interval consisted of
the
2-second interval beginning 0.5 s after the static baseline
image was shown. Only segments in which the baseline
interval was free of any participant hand/arm motion
were included in ERD analyses to ensure that all epochs
consisted of clear grasping action referenced to clean,
non-grasping baseline.

initiation of

ERD scores were calculated across participants for
each segment in 50 0.5 Hz bins from 0 to 25 Hz, at all
channels
(10(log10(Event EEG Power/Baseline EEG
Power). The ‘observe trials’ did not yield desynchro-
nization that was reliably significantly different from zero
in clear and recognizable topographic patterns indicative
of mu-rhythm. Given that a central aim of the study was
to examine the possibility that mu-rhythm desynchro-
nization reflects a neural mechanism supporting links
between action and ToM, it was critical that we had
confidence that EEG desynchronization reliably consti-
tuted the mu-rhythm. Thus, we did not continue analyses
with ‘observe trials’. ‘Execute trials’ did yield clear and
reliable mu-rhythm desynchronization (in line with a
recent meta-analysis demonstrating stronger and topo-
graphically specific mu-desynchronization during action-
execution versus action-observation conditions; Fox
et al., 2016). Thus, analyses were concentrated on these
‘execute trials’.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Action mechanisms for social cognition 7 of 16

For ‘execute trials’, the mu frequency band of interest
was identified as 8–10 Hz: this band emerged from
empirical bootstrap distributions as that which con-
tained peak desynchronization (maximal negative val-
ues) across all channels (see Thorpe et al., 2016, for
details). The ERD scores within this mu band were then
averaged across all right-hand grasp trials to obtain an
average ERD score for each participant, in each channel,
that reflected desynchronization in the 8–10 Hz mu band
during right-hand, object-directed grasp-execution.

Results

Preliminary analyses

Behavioral data

Reliable EF and ToM composites were created from
individual tasks in the batteries, and acceptable reliability
and validity was found for five items of the novel action-
representation task (see supporting information for
reliability and validity details). Table 1 shows correla-
tions among all behavioral tasks. Interrelations among
age, EF, verbal intelligence, and the action and ToM
variables (all rs > .41, ps < .007) confirm the need to
control for age, EF, and verbal
intelligence in focal
analyses.

EEG data

As shown in the 64-channel topomap in Figure 2A and
2B, two clear, topographically distinct peaks were evident
over bilateral central-parietal regions that represent

Table 1 Correlations among cognitive/behavioral variables
and age

Measure

1

2

3

4

5

–
 .33*
–
.47**  .41*
 .41**
.26
 .51**
.29
 .49**
.10

1. Action-Representation
2. Motor Skill
3. ToM
4. Verbal Intelligence
–
5. EF
6. Age
.40*
Partial correlations among cognitive/behavioral variables controlling for
age
1. Action-Representation
2. Motor Skill
3. ToM
4. Verbal Intelligence
5. EF

–
 .33*
–
.48**  .24
 .15
.25
 .40**
.28

–
.48**
.53*
.47**

–
.41**
.63**

–
.27*
.42**

–
.23

Notes: *Correlation is significant at p < .05 (two-tailed). **Correlation
is significant at p < .01 (two-tailed). N = 43.

8 of 16 Lindsay C. Bowman et al.

C

A

B

Figure 2 Three-dimensional topomaps overlayed on a 4-year-old child head model (NIH Pediatric MRI Database; University of
South Carolina McCausland Brain Imaging Center Neurodevelopmental MRI Database) showing scalp regions of peak EEG
desynchronization in the 8 to 10 Hz band (peak central-parietal desynchronization show in light blue/white regions), for left (A) and
right (B) side views. Part C shows the clusters of electrodes corresponding to central-parietal peaks (center, solid red), frontal peaks
(dashed green, top), and occipital channels (dotted blue, bottom) that were created for analyses.

maximal mu-desynchronization during children’s object-
directed grasp-execution. From this whole-scalp map,
electrode clusters were created corresponding to focal left
and right central-parietal regions (Figure 2C). We also
created contrast/control clusters in occipital regions, and

Figure 3 Grand average EEG desynchronization in 8 to
10 Hz band (N = 26) for bilateral central-parietal cluster (solid
red, left), bilateral frontal cluster (striped green, middle) and
occipital cluster (dotted blue, right). Error bars represent
standard errors of the mean.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

left and right frontal regions. Repeated-measures ANO-
VAs revealed no effect of laterality: F(1, 26) = 1.575,
p = .221. Figure 3 confirms maximal mu-desynchroniza-
tion in bilateral central-parietal regions that was signif-
icantly greater than desynchronization in both occipital
regions (t(26) = 2.184, p = .038) and bilateral frontal
regions (t(26) = 2.254, p = .033). Occipital and frontal
EEG desynchronization did not differ (t(26) = .482,
p = .634). These results demonstrate a clear neural
correlate
(mu-desynchronization in central-parietal
regions) of action-production (object-directed grasping)
that was subsequently used in analyses with behavioral
data.

Relations among behavioral and neural measures of
action

first

Our
focal analysis examined relations among
behavioral measures of action-production (i.e. motor
skill) and action-representation, and central-parietal mu-
desynchronization, as a targeted investigation of pro-
posed action-representation properties of mu. All anal-
yses were repeated with contrast frontal and occipital
clusters. To correct
for these multiple comparisons,
significance criterion was a < .017 (Bonferroni correc-
tion a = .05/3).

Correlation analyses and regressions controlling for
age, EF, and verbal intelligence indicated that neither

notable

variance

regions1

exhibited

motor skill nor action-representation directly related to
mu-desynchronization in any of central-parietal, frontal,
(rs < .23, ps > .13; bs < .050,
or occipital
ts < .85, ps > .41). There was, however, a significant
correlation between behavioral motor skill and action-
representation that withstood correction for
age
(Table 1). Given that central-parietal mu-desynchroniza-
(range = 4.74,
tion
SD = 1.18, variance = 1.402), and given the
clear
hypotheses that central-parietal mu-desynchronization
supports both action-production and action-representa-
tion, we tested a more complex relation between central-
parietal mu and the behavioral action measures. This
model served as direct test of our hypothesis that mu-
desynchronization may moderate the relation between
motor skill and action-representation, in support of a
more complex conceptualization of mu-rhythm as an
integrated network supporting multiple interconnected
neural
(e.g. action-production and action-
representation) (e.g. Pineda, 2005; Thorpe et al., 2016).
For this moderation analysis, we conducted a hierar-
chical
the
dependent variable. Age, executive functioning, and
verbal
intelligence were entered first as covariates to
control for domain-general developments, motor skill
was entered next as the predictor of interest, and then the
moderator of central-parietal mu-desynchronization was
entered as a dichotomous variable with high mu-
desynchronization (top half of median split) coded as 0
and low mu coded as 1. All of these variables combined
accounted for 21.2% of the variance in action-represen-
tation, and no entry was associated with any significant
change in the model (all DR2 < .11, ps > .11).

regression with action-representation as

systems

Critically, when the interaction term between motor
skill and mu-desynchronization was entered in the final
block,
it significantly predicted action-representation
(b = .383, SE = .108, p = .002; CI95% [.157, .610]). The
interaction term alone accounted for an additional
31.4% of the variance in action-representation (greater
than all other variables combined) and yielded a signif-
icant change in the model (F(1, 19) = 12.58, p = .002).
These results demonstrate a moderating effect of central-
parietal mu, in line with our hypothesis. For this final
model that examined children at high levels of mu-
desynchronization, advances in motor skill significantly
predicted advances in action-representation (b =  .413,
SE = .101, p < .001; CI95% [ .201,  .624]). In contrast,
in a parallel regression examining children at low central-

1 Mu-desynchronization in central-parietal,
frontal, and occipital
regions also showed no relations with age, EF, or verbal intelligence
(all rs < .20, ps > .16).

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Action mechanisms for social cognition 9 of 16

Figure 4 Moderation effect of central-parietal mu-
desynchronization (8–10 Hz) on relation between behavioral
developments in action-representation ability and motor skill.
There is a signiﬁcant positive relation between action-
representation and motor skill performance for children with
high central-parietal mu-desynchronization during object-
directed grasp (solid line) but not for children with low central-
parietal mu desynchronization (dashed line).

parietal mu (bottom half of median split), motor
skill was not associated with action-representation
(b =  .029, SE = .049, p = .559; CI95% [.0733,  .132]).
Figure 4 shows the overall moderating effect of central-
parietal mu on the relation between action-representa-
tion and motor skill. When moderation analyses were
repeated with central-parietal mu-desynchronization as a
continuous moderator, results revealed an identical
pattern: The addition of the interaction term between
motor
skill and continuous mu-desynchronization
yielded a significant
(F(1,
19) = 4.94, p = .039), and only children with mu-
desynchronization that was at least one standard devi-
ation greater than the mean showed a relation between
and action-representation (b =  .257,
motor
SE = .090, p = .010; CI95% [ .444,  .069]); the relation
between the two behavioral action constructs was
diminished for children at mean mu-desynchronization
(b =  .096, SE = .052, p = .082), and absent for chil-
dren below the mean (b = .065, SE = .089, p = .472).
EEG desynchronization in neither frontal nor occipital
regions moderated relations between action-representa-
tion and motor skill (all ps > .50).

in the model

change

skill

Relations among action measures and ToM

Our second set of focal analyses examined relations
among behavioral and neural measures of action, and
ToM performance. We first targeted relations between
ToM and the behavioral measures of motor skill and

10 of 16 Lindsay C. Bowman et al.

action-representation in order to take advantage of the
larger sample size (N = 43) associated with behavioral
measures alone. We conducted a hierarchical regression
with ToM as the dependent variable, and age, EF, and
verbal intelligence entered first as controls. Motor skill
and action-representation were then entered separately
as potential predictors of ToM, to directly test our
hypothesis
that action-production likely would not
directly predict individual differences in ToM but that
there may be an association between ToM performance
and action-representation. Control variables accounted
for a significant proportion of the variance in ToM
(Table 2). In line with our predictions, the addition of
motor skill did not significantly change the model, and
did not predict ToM beyond the controls, whereas
action-representation accounted for an additional 9.1%
variance in ToM and yielded a significant change in the
(F(1, 37) = 6.457, p = .015). Considering all
model:
variables together, action-representation was the only
significant predictor of ToM. These results evince
behavioral
links between ToM-reasoning and action-
representation: advances in ToM were associated with
advances in action-representation, even beyond variance
accounted for by age, and by EF, and verbal intelligence
– two core predictors of preschoolers’ explicit ToM (e.g.
Devine & Hughes, 2014; Milligan et al., 2007).

Next, we conducted a more exploratory analysis to
examine relations between ToM and mu-desynchroniza-
tion. There were no direct relations between ToM and
any of central-parietal, frontal, or occipital mu for either
correlations (rs < .11, ps > .29) or regressions control-
intelligence (bs < .076,
ling for age, EF, and verbal
ts < .38, ps > .71). However, guided by the above sets of
results, we explored a more complex model, this time

testing a moderated mediation model
linking mu-
desynchronization, motor skill, action-representation,
and ToM.

Specifically, given the association between motor skill
and action-representation found in the previous moder-
ation model, and the relation between action-representa-
tion and ToM in the behavioral data above, we reasoned
that it was possible that action-representation could be a
mediator (or mechanism) through which developments
in motor skill relate to developments in ToM. Given that
central-parietal mu moderated the relation between
motor skill and action-representation (i.e. the relation
was only present in children with high central-parietal
mu), we examined whether central-parietal mu also
moderated this possible mediation (i.e. tested whether
the mediation exists in children with high but not low
central-parietal mu) (see Figure 5).

To run this model, we used the PROCESS tool for
SPSS (Hayes, 2013), which computes a bias-corrected
bootstrap distribution (1000 iterations) for each direct
and indirect effect estimate. Results replicated the initial
moderation effect of central-parietal mu-desynchroniza-
tion on the relation between motor skill and action-
representation, and further showed that action-represen-
tation predicted ToM at high levels of central-parietal
mu (b = .321, SE = .145, p = .039; CI95% [.017, .625])
but not at low mu (b = .008, SE = .152, p = .961; CI95%
[ .312, .327]). As shown in Figure 5, results suggested a
moderated mediation effect. Action-representation medi-
ated the relation between motor skill and ToM at high
levels of central-parietal mu-desynchronization (condi-
for high mu: a*b =  .132,
tional
SE = .099; CI95% [ .033,  .442]; Sobel test =  .195,
SE = .068, p = .05). But there was no mediation effect at

indirect

effect

Table 2 Summary of Hierarchical Regression Analysis for Variables Predicting Theory of Mind

Variable

b (SE)

CI95%

.047 (.042)
.239 (.091)
.061 (049)

.041 (.044)
.222 (.099)
.059 (.049)
 .011 (.024)

.063 (.042)
.190 (.094)
.037 (.047)
.003 (.023)
.291 (.086)

[ .038, .131]
[.055, .423]
[ .037, .159]
[ .047, .130]
[.021, .423]
[ .040, .159]
[.038,  .060]
[ .022, .146]
[.000, .379]
[ .058, .132]
[.051,  .044]
[.044, .394]

Stage 1
Age
EF
Verbal Intelligence

Stage 2
Age
EF
Verbal Intelligence
Motor Skill

Stage 3
Age
EF
Verbal Intelligence
Motor Skill
Action-Representation

Notes: N = 43, *p < .05.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R

.618

.621

R2

.382

.385

DR2

.382*

.003

.690

.477

.091*

t

1.119
2.626*
1.256

.944
2.236*
1.209
 .444

1.487
2.022
.783
.146
2.541*

Action mechanisms for social cognition 11 of 16

(e.g. Muthukumaraswamy & Johnson, 2004). It is there-
fore possible that the mu-rhythm represents a neural
mechanism facilitating links between action and develop-
ing ToM (e.g. see Marshall & Meltzoff, 2011, 2014). Our
data help inform these hypotheses.

Functions of mu-rhythm: new insights

Central-parietal mu-desynchronization moderated rela-
tions between behavioral motor skill and action-repre-
sentation, demonstrating that mu-desynchronization is
associated with action-production – as previously shown
(e.g. Muthukumaraswamy & Johnson, 2004; Pfurtschel-
ler et al., 1997) – and with action-representation – as
many have hypothesized. However,
the associations
appear to be more complex than previously thought.

To review, researchers have interpreted the similar
EEG signal during action-perception as evidence of an
internal representation of the action that critically is
supported by the same neural system as that which
supports action-production. In brief,
it is commonly
hypothesized that mu-desynchronization reflects activity
in a single sensorimotor neural system that is activated
during both action-production and action-representa-
tion. Under this hypothesis, one might expect direct
relations between mu-desynchronization and the ability
to both produce and represent actions. In contrast, the
present study did not reveal direct correlations with mu-
desynchronization, but rather, as mu-desynchronization
increased, the strength of relation between behavioral
action-production and action-representation perfor-
mance also increased, as indicated by the moderation
model. This pattern suggests a slightly altered hypothesis
for the function of mu-rhythm, at least as it operates in
early childhood, in line with more complex conceptual-
izations of mu-rhythm as reflective of an integrated
network of multiple neural systems with specialized
functions (Pineda, 2005; Thorpe et al., 2016).

Indeed, our data suggest that individual differences in
mu-desynchronization reflect the extent to which action-
production and action-representation are integrated. At
high mu-desynchronization (conceptualized here as
reflecting stronger interconnections between network
populations supporting action-production and action-
representation), behavioral performance on action-repre-
sentation and action-production was positively corre-
lated. Conversely,
low mu-desynchronization,
performance on the two behavioral action constructs
was unrelated (e.g. possibly due to a lack of integration
in their underlying neural network).

at

This ‘integrated network’ conceptualization of mu-
rhythm can also be used to explain existing phenomena
now clearly uncovered in the infant mu-rhythm literature

Figure 5 Moderated mediation model (N = 26) depicting
action-representation mediating the relation between motor
skill and ToM only when children exhibit high mu-
desynchronization during grasp execution (bolded values).
Figure shows unstandardized betas, with standard error in
parentheses. *p ≤ .05.

a*b =  .0002,

low mu (conditional
indirect effect for low central-
parietal mu:
CI95%
[.013,  .069]; Sobel test =  .049, SE = .004, p = .96).
In addition, the index of moderated mediation showed
that the mediation effects at high and low central-
(index = .132,
parietal mu were
SE = .098, CI95% [.036, .466]).

SE = .022;

indeed different

Discussion

We investigated relations among individual differences in
the neural correlates of action-production (mu-desyn-
chronization during execution of object-directed grasp-
ing), and performance on behavioral measures of action-
production (i.e. motor skill), action-representation, and
explicit ToM. We found evidence for novel foundational
links between individual differences in ToM and both
behavioral and neural measures of action – beyond the
influence of executive functioning and verbal
intelli-
gence. These findings shed new light on the potential
origins and developmental mechanisms of higher social
cognition.

Several researchers posit that action-production and
action-representation are important
for mental-state
understanding (e.g. Woodward, 2013; Meltzoff, 2002;
Hunnius & Bekkering, 2014). Neuroscientific research has
identified a neural system – indexed with the EEG
mu-rhythm – that is associated with action-processing,
and is hypothesized to reflect action-representation

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

12 of 16 Lindsay C. Bowman et al.

– namely, that infants who gain more action-production
experience also show greater mu-desynchronization dur-
ing action-perception (e.g. Cannon et al., 2016; Marshall
et al., 2013; Saby, Marshall & Meltzoff, 2012; van Elk
et al., 2008; Paulus et al., 2012). To illustrate, mu-
rhythm may reflect integration of systems specialized
for action-production and action-representation, but
each system could be differentially activated across
perception and production modalities. For instance,
action-perception may most strongly activate the system
for action-representation. Thus, when an infant activates
their action-representation system during action-percep-
tion, this system could be more or less integrated with a
system supporting action-production. When that infant
then gains experience in production of a specific motor
act, this experience could serve to slightly enhance the
integration between the infant’s own motor act and a
stored representation of it. Critically, when the infant
then perceives that motor act again, it would result in
greater mu-desynchronization because the neural popu-
lations underlying action-representation (activated most
directly by action-perception) have more connections to
the neural populations underlying action-production, to
result in an overall greater neural response as reflected in
higher mu-desynchronization.

It is important to note that though this integrated
network model for mu-rhythm fits with existing infant
findings as outlined in the paragraph above, it does not
preclude other possible conceptualizations of mu-rhythm
development. Indeed, two differences exist between our
study and the approaches most commonly taken in the
infant mu literature, which point
to other possible
conceptualizations. First, we examined mu-desynchroni-
zation in children 3 to 5 years old, whereas much existing
research on associations between behavior and mu-
rhythm examines infants less than 2 years old. It is
therefore possible that mu-rhythm reflects different
neural processes in infancy compared to early childhood.
The infant mu-rhythm may reflect activity in a single
sensorimotor neural system, but then, as production and
representational abilities mature, there could be accom-
panied neural reorganization and specialization into
separate systems that then integrate through further
reorganization and development. Second, we examined
mu-desynchronization during action-production, whereas
infant studies more commonly examine mu-desynchro-
nization during action-perception. It is therefore also
possible that the desynchronization in production and
perception conditions reflects activity in different under-
lying neural systems. To shed light on each of these
possibilities,
future research should look for direct
relations between mu-desynchronization and behavioral
measures of action-representation and action-production

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

in infants and children prior to age 3 years, as well as
track these relations longitudinally over infancy to early
childhood. The present study lays a foundation for these
future directions.

Finally, the moderation model evident in our data
provides only indirect support for the notion of mu-
rhythm as an integrated network of neural systems. More
direct support would come from network connectivity
analyses of mu-desynchronization, which could represent
an important replication of our analyses should mu-
rhythm network interconnectivity predict the strength of
correlation between behavioral measures of action-
production and action-representation and/or should
functional connections increase in strength as infants
and children mature and advance in their action-
production and representation abilities.

Even in advance of future research, the conceptualiza-
tion of mu-rhythm as an ‘integrated network’ (versus more
common conceptualizations that emphasize specifically
sensorimotor activity) has implications for theorizing
about neural mechanisms supporting cognitive develop-
ment. For example, an action-representation system,
which may be separate from but networked to the motor
system, could plausibly store representations of actions to
then be evaluated at higher levels. Such a network would
have clear implications for how developments in action
experience (which may be supported by the motor system
more directly) could shape a deeper understanding and
evaluation of actions in terms of the cognitive constructs
that motivate them, as we discuss next.

Action-representation mechanisms for ToM
development

Our data demonstrate links between children’s develop-
ing ToM and developments in the action domain, and
thus they critically extend infant work that evinces ties
between action and social understanding in early life
(Woodward, 2013). Specifically, results suggest
that
action-representation is particularly important for expli-
cit ToM development in early childhood: action-repre-
sentation was the single best predictor of individual
differences in 3- to 5-year-olds’ explicit ToM, even
beyond verbal
robust
predictors). Results therefore provide the first more
direct support for theories that posit a foundational role
for action-processing in more complex mental-state
understanding and ToM (e.g. Meltzoff, 2002, 2013).

intelligence and EF (classic,

We also found evidence that behavioral action-
representation mediated relations between children’s
motor skill and ToM development, but only for children
exhibiting high central-parietal mu-desynchronization
during grasp-execution. This moderated mediation

model was not directly hypothesized, but rather was
inspired by our findings that mu-desynchronization
moderated relations between action-production (motor
skill) and action-representation performance, and that
action-representation strongly and directly predicted
children’s ToM. Replication of these results is important
given the somewhat post-hoc nature of this model, the
novelty of our action-representation task, and the very
limited sample size.

Nonetheless, the moderated mediation model suggests
that in addition to action-representation abilities, action-
production abilities and the neural systems associated
with action-processing may also be important for ToM
development. Speculatively, the ability to hold an action
in one’s mind, in the absence of direct perception or
production (i.e. as a representation), is perhaps a critical
step in facilitating the necessary computations to then
reason about the motivating mental states behind that
action (ToM). Indeed, several researchers have hypoth-
esized that action-representations are derived from
experience in action-production, and that together they
facilitate developing understanding of the mental states
motivating action (e.g. Hunnius & Bekkering, 2014;
Woodward, 2013; Meltzoff, 2002, 2013).

Intriguingly, the moderation aspect of our model
further suggests that
this mediation pathway from
action-production to action-representation to ToM is
only viable once a neural network supporting action-
production and action-representation is sufficiently inte-
grated (high mu-desynchronization). When there is no
neural system in place to link action-production and
action-representation, then advancements in these action
domains do not serve to advance ToM.

As noted above, an action-representation system that
is separate from yet networked to the motor system is a
plausible system for storing actions (in the absence of
execution or perception) and thus subsequently facilitat-
ing evaluation of those actions at higher levels. There-
fore, this system may be particularly important for
supporting evaluations of the mental states that motivate
action, thereby helping facilitate the development of
ToM. That is, speculatively, an action-representation
system – when sufficiently integrated with action-
production via a common neural network – may be
helpful for identifying connections between one’s own
executed motor actions and the mental states that
motivate them. These connections may in turn be helpful
for identifying and reasoning about the mental states
motivating the actions of others. In line with this
reasoning, Meltzoff (2002, 2007, 2013) has argued that
the development of executing one’s own actions as
motivated by one’s own mental states, and the ability to
identify similarities between one’s own and others’

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Action mechanisms for social cognition 13 of 16

actions, are two central components in jump-starting
ToM. Longitudinal research that tracks associations
between individual differences in mu-desynchronization,
developing understanding of mental
states, action-
production, and action-representation from infancy to
childhood will be critical
in further illuminating the
model and hypotheses outlined here.

Additional considerations for future research

Although our final moderated mediation model sug-
gested a direction from action-production to action-
representation to ToM (with models testing the same
measures in other positions returning null results),
longitudinal data are necessary to identify true direction
and causality. Future research should also extend to
younger as well as older age ranges: given dissociations
between action and ToM systems in adults (Van Over-
walle, 2009), it is possible that complex relations between
mu-desynchronization, action-production, action-repre-
sentation, and ToM might be particularly important
(and/or evident) when children are newly assembling
social-cognitive abilities, with diminished relations
among variables later in development. An additional
consideration for future research is the possibility that
our action-representation task included a component of
mental spatial rotation, and that developments in ToM
may also be related to developments in some aspect of
spatial cognition. Finally, although our data fit with
theoretical models emphasizing action mechanisms for
social-cognitive development,
they do not preclude
alternative theories (e.g. Theory Theory; Gopnik &
Wellman, 1992, 2012). For example, developments in
action-production and action-representation – in partic-
ular once integrated in a mature network – may allow
children to identify important contingencies between
their own actions and mental states, which, in line with
‘Theory Theory’, may then lead to the formation and
revision of na€ıve theories
state
inferences and interpretation of others’ behavior. The
findings from the present study therefore open important
avenues for future research and conceptualizations of the
origins and course of ToM development.

that guide mental

Acknowledgements

We thank the research assistants who helped with data
collection and analyses, and the parents and children
who participated in the study. This
research was
supported by Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development Grant P01-
HD064653, awarded to A. L. Woodward and N. A. Fox.

14 of 16 Lindsay C. Bowman et al.

References

Ambrosini, E., Reddy, V., de Looper, A., Costantini, M.,
Lopez, B. et al. (2013). Looking ahead: anticipatory gaze
and motor ability in infancy. PLoS ONE, 8, e67916.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0067916

Bell, M.A., & Cuevas, K. (2012). Using EEG to study cognitive
development: issues and practices. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 13, 281–294.

Blakemore, S., & Decety, J. (2001). From the perception of
action to the understanding of intention. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 2, 561–567. doi:10.1038/35086023

Brune, C.W., & Woodward, A.L. (2007). Social cognition and
social responsiveness in 10-month-old infants. Journal of
Cognition and Development, 8, 133–158.

Cannon, E.N., Simpson, E.A., Fox, N.A., Vanderwert, R.E.,
Woodward, A.L. et al. (2016). Relations between infants’
emerging reach-grasp competence and event-related desyn-
chronization in EEG. Developmental Science, 19 (1), 50–62.
Cannon, E.N., Woodward, A.L., Gredeb€ack, G., von Hofsten,
C., & Turek, C. (2012). Action production influences 12-
month-old infants’ attention to others’ actions. Developmen-
tal Science, 15, 35–42. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01095.x
Carlson, S.M., Davis, A., & Leach, J.G. (2005). Less is more:
executive function and symbolic representation in preschool
children. Psychological Science, 16, 609–616.

Carlson, S.M., & Moses, L.J. (2001). Individual differences in
inhibitory control and children’s Theory of Mind. Child
Development, 72, 1032–1063.

Cuevas, K., Cannon, E.N., Yoo, K., & Fox, N.A. (2014). The
infant EEG mu rhythm: methodological considerations and
best practices. Developmental Review, 34, 26–43.

Cuevas, K., Raj, V., & Bell, M.A. (2012). A frequency band
analysis of two-year-olds’ memory processes. International
Journal of Psychophysiology, 83, 315–322. doi:10.1016/j.ijpsy-
cho.2011.11.009

Daum, M.M., Sommerville, J.A., & Prinz, W. (2009). How
social experience is related to children’s intergroup attitudes.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 39, 1196–1206.
doi:10.1002/ejsp

Decety, J., & Grezes, J. (2006). The power of simulation:
imagining one’s own and other’s behavior. Brain Research,
1079, 4–14. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2005.12.115

Devine, R.T., & Hughes, C. (2014). Relations between false
belief understanding and executive function in early child-
hood: a meta-analysis. Child Development, 85 (5), 1777–1794.
doi:10.1111/cdev.12237

Fox, N.A., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M.J., Yoo, K.H., Bow-
man, L.C., Cannon, E.N. et al. (2016). Assessing human
mirror activity with EEG mu rhythm: a meta-analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 142 (3), 291–313.

Frith, C.D., & Frith, U. (1999). Interacting minds: a biological
basis. Science, 286, 1692–1695. doi:10.1126/science.286.
5445.1692

Gallese, V., & Sinigaglia, C. (2011). What is so special about
embodied simulation? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15, 512–
519. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2011.09.003

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Gerson, S.A., Bekkering, H., & Hunnius, S. (2015). Short-term
motor training, but not observational training, alters neu-
rocognitive mechanisms of action processing in infancy.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 27 (6), 1207–1214.

Gerson, S.A., & Woodward, A.L. (2014). Learning from their
own actions: the unique effect of producing actions on infants’
action understanding. Child Development, 85, 264–277.

Goldman, A.I. (1992). In defense of simulation theory. Mind &

Language, 7, 104–119.

Gordon, R.M. (1996). ‘Radical’ simulationism. In P. Car-
ruthers & P.K. Smith (Eds.), Theories of theories of mind (pp.
11–21). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H.M. (1992). Why the child’s Theory

of Mind really is a theory. Mind & Language, 7, 145–171.

Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H.M. (2012). Reconstructing con-
structivism: causal models, Bayesian learning mechanisms,
and the theory theory. Psychological Bulletin, 138 (6), 1085–
1108. doi:10.1037/a0028044

Hari, R., Salmelin, R., M€akel€a, J.P., Salenius, S., & Helle, M.
(1997). Magnetoencephalographic cortical rhythms. Interna-
tional Journal of Psychophysiology, 26, 51–62. doi:10.1016/
S0167- 8760(97)00755-1

Hyv€arinen, A. (1999). Fast and robust fixed-point algorithms
for independent component analysis. IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks, 10, 626–634.

Hayes, A.G. (2013). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and
conditional process analysis: A regression-based approach.
New York: The Guilford Press.

Henderson, S.E., & Sugden, D.A. (1992). Movement assessment
battery for children manual. London: The Psychological
Corporation.

Hunnius, S., & Bekkering, H. (2014). What are you doing? How
active and observational experience shape infants’ action
understanding. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soci-
ety B: Biological Sciences, 369 (1644), 20130490. doi:10.1098/
rstb.2013.0490

Kanakogi, Y., & Itakura, S. (2011). Develomental correspon-
dence between action prediction and motor ability in early
infancy. Nature Communications, 2, 41. doi:10.1038/ncomm-
s1342

Kaufman, A., & Kaufman, N. (1990). Kaufman Brief Intelli-

gence Test. Bloomington, MN: Pearson.

Kuhlman, W. (1978). Functional topography of the human mu
rhythm. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiol-
ogy, 44, 83–93.

Leocani, L., Toro, C., Manganotti, P., Zhuang, P., & Hallett,
M. (1997). Event-related coherence and event-related desyn-
chronization/ synchronization in the 10 Hz and 20 Hz EEG
during self-paced move- ments. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology, 104, 199–206. doi:10.1016/S0168-
5597(96)96051-7

Lepage, J.F., & Theoret, H. (2006). EEG evidence for the
presence of an action observation–execution matching sys-
tem in children. European Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 2505–
2510.

Manoel, E.J., & Connolly, K.J. (1998). The development of
manual dexterity in young children. In K.J. Connolly

(Ed.), The psychobiology of the hand (Clinics in develop-
mental medicine, no. 147) (pp. 177–198). London: MacK-
eith Press.

Marshall, P.J., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2011). Neural mirroring
systems: exploring the EEG mu rhythm in human infancy.
Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 1, 110–123.

Marshall, P.J., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2014). Neural mirroring
mechanisms and imitation in human infants. Philosophi-
cal Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series
B, Biological Sciences, 369, 20130620. doi:10.1098/rstb.
2013.0620

Marshall, P.J., Saby, J.N., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2013). Infant brain
responses to object weight: exploring goal-directed actions
Infancy, 18, 942–960. doi:10.1111/
and self-experience.
infa.12012

Marshall, P.J., Young, T., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2011). Neural
correlates of action observation and execution in 14-month-
old infants: an event-related EEG desynchronization study.
Developmental Science, 14, 474–480. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
7687.2010.00991.x

Meltzoff, A.N. (2002). Imitation as a mechanism of social
cognition: origins of empathy, Theory of Mind, and the
representation of action. In U. Goswami (Ed.), Blackwell
handbook of childhood cognitive development (pp. 6–25).
Oxford: Blackwell.

Meltzoff, A.N. (2007). ‘Like me’: a foundation for social

cognition. Developmental Science, 10, 126–134.

Meltzoff, A.N. (2013). Origins of social cognition: bidirectional
self–other mapping and the ‘like-me’ hypothesis. In M.
Banaji & S. Gelman (Eds.), Navigating the social world: What
infants, children, and other species can teach us (pp. 139–144).
New York: Oxford University Press.

Milligan, K., Astington, J.W., & Dack, L.A. (2007). Language
and Theory of Mind: meta-analysis of the relation between
language ability and false-belief understanding. Child
Development, 78, 622–646. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.
01018.x

Muthukumaraswamy, S.D., & Johnson, B.W. (2004). Changes
in rolandic mu rhythm during observation of a precision grip.
Psychophysiology, 41, 152–156.

Paulus, M., Hunnius, S., van Elk, M., & Bekkering, H. (2012).
How learning to shake a rattle affects 8-month-old infants’
perception of the rattle’s sound: electrophysiological evi-
dence for action-effect binding in infancy. Developmental
Cognitive Neuroscience, 2, 90–96.

Pfurtscheller, G., Neuper, C., Andrew, C., & Edlinger, G.
(1997). Foot and hand area mu rhythms. International
Journal of Psychophysiology, 26, 121–135.

Pineda, J.A. (2005). The functional significance of mu rhythms:
into ‘doing’. Brain

translating ‘seeing’ and ‘hearing’
Research Reviews, 50, 57–68.

Saby, J.N., Marshall, P.J., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2012). Neural
correlates of being imitated: an EEG study in preverbal
infants. Social Neuroscience, 7, 650–661. doi:10.1080/
17470919.2012.691429

Saby, J.N., Meltzoff, A.N., & Marshall, P.J. (2013). Infants’
somatotopic neural responses to seeing human actions: I’ve

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Action mechanisms for social cognition 15 of 16

got you under my skin. PLoS ONE, 8, e77905. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0077905

Salmelin, R., & Hari, R. (1994a). Spatiotemporal characteris-
tics of sensorimotor neuromagnetic rhythms related to
thumb movement. Neuroscience, 60, 537–550. doi:10.1016/
0306-4522(94)90263-1

Salmelin, R., & Hari, R. (1994b). Characterization of sponta-
neous MEG rhythms in healthy adults. Electroencephalogra-
phy and Clinical Neurophysiology, 91, 237–248. doi:10.1016/
0013- 4694(94)90187-2

Scholl, B.J., & Leslie, A.M. (1999). Modularity, development

and ‘Theory of Mind’. Mind & Language, 14, 131–153.

Sommerville, J.A., Hildebrand, E.A., & Crane, C.C. (2008).
Experience matters: the impact of doing versus watching on
infants’ subsequent perception of tool-use events. Develop-
mental Psychology, 44, 1249–1256. doi:10.1037/a0012296

Sommerville, J.A., Woodward, A.L., & Needham, A. (2005).
Action experience alters 3-month-old infants’ perception of
others’ actions. Cognition, 96, B1–B11. doi:10.1016/j.cogni-
tion.2004.07.004

Southgate, V., Johnson, M.H., Osborne, T., & Csibra, G.
(2009). Predictive motor activation during action observation
in human infants. Biology Letters, 5, 769–772. doi:10.1098/
rsbl.2009.0474

Thorpe, S., Cannon, E., & Fox, N. (2016). Spectral and source
structural development of mu and alpha rhythms from
infancy through adulthood. Journal of Clinical Neurophysi-
ology, 127 (1), 254–269. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2015.03.004

Toro, C., Deuschl, G., Thatcher, R., Sato, S., Kufta, C. et al.
(1994). Event-related desynchronization and movement-
related cortical potentials on the ECoG and EEG. Elec-
troencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 93, 380–
389. doi:10.1016/0168- 5597(94)90126-0

Upshaw, M.B., Bernier, R.A., & Sommerville, J.A. (2016).
Infants’ grip strength predicts mu rhythm attenuation
during observation of lifting actions with weighted blocks.
Developmental Science, 19 (2), 195–207. doi:10.1111/desc.
12308

Van Elk, M., van Schie, H.T., Hunnius, S., Vesper, C., &
Bekkering, H. (2008). You’ll never crawl alone: neurophys-
iological evidence for experience-dependent motor resonance
in infancy. NeuroImage, 43, 808–814.

Van Overwalle, F. (2009). Social cognition and the brain: a
meta-analysis. Human Brain Mapping, 30, 829–858. doi:10.
1002/hbm.20547

Virji-Babul, N., Rose, A., Moiseeva, N., & Makan, N. (2012).
Neural correlates of action understanding in infants: influ-
ence of motor experience. Brain and Behavior, 2, 237–242.
doi:10.1002/brb3.50

Warreyn, P., Ruysschaert, L., Wiesema, J.R., Handl, A.,
Pattyn, G. et al. (2013). Infants’ mu suppression during the
observation of real and mimicked goal-directed actions.
Developmental Science, 16 (2), 173–185. doi:10.1111/desc.
12014

Wellman, H.M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis
of Theory of Mind development: the truth about false belief.
Child Development, 72, 655–684.

16 of 16 Lindsay C. Bowman et al.

Wellman, H.M., & Liu, D. (2004). Scaling of Theory of Mind

tasks. Child Development, 75, 523–541.

Wimmer, H., & Perner, J.

(1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs
in young children’s understanding of deception. Cognition,
13, 103–128.

Woodward, A.L. (2013). Infant foundations of intentional
understanding. In M.R. Banaji & S.A. Gelman (Eds.),
Navigating the social world: A developmental perspective
(pp. 75–80). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Woodward, A.L., & Gerson, S.A. (2014). Mirroring and the
development of action understanding. Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological
Sciences, 369, 20130181. doi:10.1098/rstb.2013.0181

Woodward, A.L., & Guajardo, J.J. (2002). Infants’ understand-
ing of
the point gesture as an object-directed action.
Cognitive Development, 17, 1061–1084. doi:10.1016/S0885-
2014(02)00074-6

Yoo, K.H., Cannon, E.N., Thorpe, S.G., & Fox, N.A. (2015).
Desynchronization in EEG during perception of means–end

actions and relations with infants’ grasping skill. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 34, 24–37.

Zelazo, P.D. (2006). The dimensional change card sort (DCCS):
a method of assessing executive function in children. Nature
Protocols, 1, 297–301.

Received: 4 September 2014
Accepted: 24 March 2016

Supporting Information

Additional Supporting Information may be found online in the
supporting information tab for this article:

Figure S1 Histogram of children’s action-representation task
performance scores (N=43) showing the frequency distribution
of scores across the sample. Bars represent the number of
children who achieved a given score. The distribution of scores
reasonably approaches normal, as can be seen by reference to
the simulated normal curve superimposed on the data.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd


The ENd of Document.