JOURNAL OF COGNITION AND DEVELOPMENT

ISSN: 1524-8372 (Print) 1532-7647 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hjcd20

Social Cognition and Social Responsiveness in 10-
month-old Infants

Camille W. Brune & Amanda L. Woodward

To cite this article: Camille W. Brune & Amanda L. Woodward (2007) Social Cognition and Social
Responsiveness in 10-month-old Infants, JOURNAL OF COGNITION AND DEVELOPMENT, 8:2,
133-158, DOI: 10.1080/15248370701202331
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/15248370701202331

Published online: 05 Dec 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 276

View related articles 

Citing articles: 40 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hjcd20

JOURNAL OF COGNITION AND DEVELOPMENT, 8(2), 133–158
Copyright © 2007, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Social Cognition and Social

Responsiveness in 10-month-old Infants

Camille W. Brune and Amanda L. Woodward

Department of Psychology

University of Chicago

In this study, we investigated relations between infants’ understanding of intentional
actions and measures of social responsiveness during a transitional period, 9- to
11-months. Infants (N = 52) were tested in visual habituation paradigms tapping their
understanding of the relation between a person and the object of her attention. Mea-
sures of social responsiveness included orienting to the target of another’s attention,
point production, and supported joint attention in parent–child play. Infants’ re-
sponses to the habituation events were related to their social responsiveness. Distinct
factors for understanding actions and social responsiveness as relational were re-
vealed. Infants who produced object-directed points were more likely to understand
pointing as relational, and infants who engaged in high amounts of shared attention
were more likely to understand gaze. Infants’ tendency to orient in response to an
adult’s gaze shifts and points was unrelated to their understanding of gaze and point-
ing. These findings elucidate the ways in which social cognition and social respon-
siveness, although distinct, are related in development.

Between 9 and 12 months of age, infants begin to participate in increasingly rich
triadic interactions. During this period, the shift in complexity of infants’ social
behavior is so dramatic that Tomasello (1995) dubbed it the “social-cognitive revo-
lution”. This term implies that changes in infants’ social responsiveness are
accompanied by changes in their understanding of others’ actions. Although this
assumption provides the foundation for many theories of social-cognitive develop-
ment, until now it has not been empirically tested. Tomasello and colleagues
(Tomasello, Carpenter, Call, Behne, & Moll, 2005, pp. 689) highlighted the need

Correspondence should be sent to Camille W. Brune, Institute for Juvenile Research, Department of
Psychiatry (MC 747), University of Illinois at Chicago, 1747 West Roosevelt Rd., Room 155, Chicago,
Illinois 60608. Email: cbrune@psych.uic.edu

134

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

for this research when they recently wrote, “There has been almost no research—
not even training studies or correlational studies—that establishes a solid relation-
ship between any kind of particular social experience infants might have and indi-
vidual differences in the unfolding of [intentional action knowledge].” We began
to fill this gap by seeking clearer evidence concerning the relation between social
responsiveness and intentional action knowledge during infancy.

By social responsiveness, we mean the initiation of behaviors that are shaped in
response to the actions of another person and fulfill a social function. Similar be-
haviors might be a demonstration of social responsiveness in one context and not
in another, depending on the functions they serve. To illustrate, consider two exam-
ples of gaze behavior, gazing at a social partner’s face to establish joint attention
and gazing at a passerby on the street. The first is socially responsive behavior,
whereas the second may not be.

Human infants are socially responsive from early infancy in their dyadic inter-
actions with caretakers (Hains & Muir, 1996; Jaffe, Beatrice, Stanley, Crown, &
Jasnow, 2001; Tronick, 1989). For example, in the first few months of life, infants’
rate of smiling declines when their mothers look away from them (Hains & Muir).
Toward the end of the first year of life, infants begin to incorporate outside entities,
such as objects or events, in their interactions with others. These triadic interac-
tions (i.e., between infant, other, object) often involve sharing attention on objects
during play (Bakeman & Adamson, 1984). During these interactions, infants fol-
low adults’ gaze (Butterworth & Grover, 1990; Carpenter, Nagell, & Tomasello,
1998; Moore & Corkum, 1998; Scaife & Bruner, 1975), spend increasingly long
bouts engaged in shared attention with adults (Bakeman & Adamson), and pro-
duce communicative gestures, such as showing or pointing, which may function to
direct adults’ attention (Bates, Benigni, Bretherton, Camaioni, & Volterra, 1979;
Carpenter et al., 1998; Liszkowski, Carpenter, Henning, Striano, & Tomasello,
2004) or to elicit responses from adults (see Corkum & Moore, 1995).

The marked developments in triadic behaviors between 9 and 12 months have
been used to support the argument that intentional understanding first appears dur-
ing this time period. In fact, infants’ emerging social responsiveness in triadic in-
teractions provides a foundation for several current theories of social-cognitive de-
velopment. To start, these behaviors have been taken as evidence that infants
understand others’ intentions (Bretherton, 1991; Carpenter et al., 1998; Tomasello,
1999). For example, Tomasello (1999) proposed that “different joint attentional
behaviors in which infants follow, direct, or share adult attention and behavior are
not separate activities or cognitive domains; they are simply different behavioral
manifestations of this same underlying understanding of other persons as inten-
tional agents” (p. 64). This assumption stems from rich interpretations of the social
function of behaviors, for example, assuming that infants alternate gaze to assess
the adult’s focus of attention (for alternative interpretations, see Baldwin & Moses,
1996; Corkum & Moore, 1995).

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIVENESS

135

Furthermore, infants’ engagement in triadic interactions has been hypothesized
to play a formative role in the development of intentional understanding. For ex-
ample, Moore and colleagues (Barresi & Moore, 1996; Corkum & Moore, 1995,
1998; Moore & Corkum, 1994) suggested that infants’ social responsiveness sets
the conditions for the discovery of others’ intentions. Through engagement in joint
attention episodes, they proposed, infants align their own states of attention with
the observable actions of others, thereby coming to understand others’ inner states.
Infants initially create merged representations of their own and others’ intentional
states during triadic interactions, and, in later development, they come to differen-
tiate their own intentions from those of others (for similar proposals, see
Carpendale & Lewis, 2004; Tomasello, 1999).

These accounts are noteworthy because they take seriously the role of environ-
mental structure and conceptual learning in infant social cognition, thereby offer-
ing an alternative to strongly nativist accounts. However, empirical investigation of
these proposals has been restricted by a reliance on infants’ social responsiveness
as the chief source of evidence for their underlying social cognition. When infants
follow others’ gaze shifts, point to objects, and engage in shared attention, the ar-
gument goes, their actions directly reflect underlying conceptions of others’ inten-
tions and attention. However, these behaviors are open to more than one interpreta-
tion, and their status as evidence of underlying social cognition has been hotly
debated. To illustrate, Moore and his colleagues (Barresi & Moore; Corkum &
Moore, 1996) suggested that infants’ propensity to follow gaze could be the result
of low-level orienting responses or perhaps operant reinforcement, and, therefore,
may not reflect knowledge about others’ attention. Similarly, Baldwin and Moses
(1996) suggested that infants’ tendency to look toward a parent’s face when con-
fronted with an ambiguous situation might reflect comfort seeking, rather than at-
tempts to monitor the parent’s focus of attention.

Infants’ overt attempts to direct others’ attention via pointing and other commu-
nicative gestures seem to provide clearer evidence that infants understand others’
states of attention (Liszkowski et al., 2004). These behaviors have also been sub-
ject to lean as well as rich interpretations. Infants begin to produce points directed
at objects as early as 9 months of age in some cases (Bates et al., 1979; Bates,
Camaioni, & Volterra, 1975; Carpenter et al., 1998; Trevarthen, 1977). However,
the function of these early points may be to mark infants’ own focus of attention
(Kaye, 1982; Werner & Kaplan, 1963), rather than to direct another person’s atten-
tion. After 12 months of age, infants accompany points with gaze alternation be-
tween the onlooker and the object (Bates et al., 1979; Carpenter et al., 1998).
Moreover, infants initiate shared attention by alternating their gaze between a per-
son and an object (i.e., engaging in coordinated joint attention) beginning at
around 12 months of age (Bakeman & Adamson, 1984; Carpenter et al., 1998). Al-
though these more complex actions are often taken as evidence for infants’ under-
standing of others’ attention, several researchers have argued that they may reflect

136

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

something less sophisticated. For example, Moore (Moore & Corkum, 1994;
Moore & D’Entremont, 2001) suggested that infants turn to the adult after pointing
because they anticipate the adult’s response, rather than out of a desire to monitor
the adult’s attention (but see Liszkowski et al., 2004).

Research with other populations highlights the problems of inferring social
cognition from well-organized social responses. For instance, similar debates have
arisen in the domain of animal cognition. Although some nonhuman primates fol-
low gaze and anticipate others’ actions, it is not clear that they possess rich or ab-
stract conceptions of intention or attention (Call, Hare, Carpenter, & Tomasello,
2004; Povinelli, 2001; Povinelli & Eddy, 1996; Tomasello, Call, & Hare, 2003;
Whiten, 1994). In some human populations, the relation between social responses
and social cognition is also unclear. For example, individuals with autism, charac-
terized by deficits in social responsiveness, can learn to produce social responses
to particular cues (Klin, Schultz, & Cohen, 2000). Unfortunately, this learning
does not generalize well to an understanding of others’ behavior in novel situations
(Klin et al., 2000). The cooccurrence of deficits in social behavior and social un-
derstanding in autism may be unique (e.g., Mundy, 2003; Travis, Sigman, &
Ruskin, 2001). However, even typical adults’ social responses, like gaze following,
do not always reflect underlying attributions of attention or intention (Driver et al.,
1999; Ricciardelli, Bricolo, Aglioti, & Chelazzi, 2002).

A second problem is that reliance on social responsiveness as evidence for so-
cial cognition contributes to a circular argument in which researchers have pro-
posed that social responsiveness is both an effect of social cognition and a cause of
this effect (Barresi & Moore, 1996; Carpenter et al., 1998; Tomasello, 1999). For
example, one could argue that infants who produce robust orienting responses may
be more likely to “catch” the target of another’s attention. Consequently, robust
orienters learn to form a relation between a person and the object of her attention,
which in turn causes them to orient to the targets more. Although this argument and
others like it might be true, they are impossible to test without an independent
source of evidence about infants’ underlying knowledge of attentional relations.
These considerations indicate the need for alternative sources of evidence about
infants’ social cognition.

Recent studies point to the kind of evidence that could address these problems.
Several studies have used visual habituation measures to investigate infants’ un-
derstanding of intentional action, and, in particular, their appreciation of the invisi-
ble relation between a person and the object of his or her attention (Phillips,
Wellman, & Spelke, 2002; Sodian & Thoermer, 2004; Woodward, 2003; Wood-
ward & Guajardo, 2002). To illustrate, in one study (Woodward, 2003), infants
viewed events like the ones depicted in Figure 1. Infants were habituated to an ac-
tor turning to look at one of two toys, a teddy bear and a ball. After infants habitu-
ated to this event, the positions of the toys were reversed. Infants then saw alternat-
ing trials in which (a) the relation between the actor and the object changed (new

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIVENESS

137

FIGURE 1 Diagram of sample habituation and test trials in Woodward (2003).

object trials) or (b) the actor’s direction of motion changed, but her relation to the
object did not (new side trials). If infants represented the relation between the actor
and the object of her attention during habituation, then they were predicted to look
longer at the new object trials than the new side trials because the actor-object rela-
tion was disrupted. Infants at 12 months of age, but not 7 or 9 months of age,
looked significantly longer at the new object trials than the new side trials, which
suggests that they responded to the change in the actor-object relation. Other stud-
ies have converged in indicating a transition in infants’ understanding of
attentional relations between 9 and 12 months of age (Phillips et al., 2002; Sodian
& Thoermer, 2004; Woodward & Guajardo, 2002).

In these studies, the behavior that indexes social cognition is not a social re-
sponse. Looking times in habituation procedures are generally assumed to index
information processing and novelty detection. Studies that have employed this
method to assess infants’ understanding of intentional action report similar

138

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

patterns of habituation and dishabituation to those involving inanimate events.
Moreover, although the context of the study might be seen as social in some re-
spects because the infant views a person, longer looking times on some test trials
versus others serve no obvious social function.

Further evidence that looking times in this kind of habituation procedure are
distinct from social responses comes from an analysis of a social response in the
context of these studies. In the Woodward (2003) study, infants followed the exper-
imenter’s gaze. This social response was distinct from infants’ overall looking
times on the experimental test events. Infants at each age (7, 9, and 12 months)
spent more time looking at the target of the actor’s gaze than the other toy, regard-
less of whether they viewed new object or new side trials. For the younger infants,
there was a disassociation between their understanding of the looking relation and
their gaze following; they did not encode gaze as relational, yet they followed the
actor’s gaze. Woodward and Guajardo (2002) reported similar findings for infants’
understanding of and responses to pointing events.

These findings suggest that the visual-habituation paradigm can provide an in-
dependent measure of infants’ understanding of intentional action, thus providing
a way to investigate relations between social responsiveness and social cognition.
Indeed, an initial investigation has suggested that informative relations exist be-
tween infants’ social responsiveness and their social cognition. Woodward and
Guajardo (2002) found that between 9 and 12 months of age, infants’ understand-
ing of pointing as relational (as assessed in the habituation paradigm) was corre-
lated with their own ability to produce object-directed points. Infants who pro-
duced object-directed points encoded pointing as relational, but infants who did
not yet produce points did not do so. Because the infants who pointed did not differ
in age from those who did not yet point, the relation between point production and
point comprehension was not accounted for by age.

In this study, we investigated the potential relations between infants’ emerging
social responsiveness and their emerging social cognition between 9 and 12
months of age. We tested 10-month-old infants to investigate whether and how
measures of social responsiveness and social cognition are related during a transi-
tional period, when both social responsiveness and social cognition are undergoing
development. Social responsiveness was assessed using four measures: gaze and
point following in a naturalistic paradigm, orienting to the target of an actor’s at-
tention in the visual-habituation paradigm, parent report and observation of ob-
ject-directed pointing, and shared attention in parent–child play. Social cognition
was assessed using the difference in infants’ looking time to the test events in the
visual-habituation paradigm as indicative of understanding attentional relations.
Infants participated in two visual-habituation sessions to index their understanding
of two canonical expressions of attention, looking and pointing. By exploring the
concurrent relations across these tasks, our goal was to take an initial step toward
discovering developmental relations between social responsiveness and social
cognition in infancy.

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIVENESS

139

Testing the same infants in two different habituation paradigms also allowed us
to investigate a second issue: the extent to which infants’ understanding of
attentional relations is uniform across different kinds of actions. Comparing across
infants (Sodian, Schoeppner, & Metz, 2004) and across studies (Moore, 1999;
Woodward, 2003; Woodward & Guajardo, 2002), we know that infants typically
begin to understand both gaze and pointing as relational between 9 and 13 months
of age. However, whether understanding one action is associated with understand-
ing the other is currently unknown. We addressed this question by investigating
correlations in infants’ responses in the gaze and point habituation procedures, as
well as by assessing whether responses in these two procedures correlate with the
same aspects of social responsiveness.

METHOD

Participants

Fifty-two full-term infants from the Chicago area participated in this study. Partici-
pants were recruited from mailings and advertisements. Their parents were offered
$10 to reimburse their travel expenses. Infants between 9 and 11 months of age
were recruited with a mean age across visits of 10 months 3 days (range 9 months 2
days to 11 months 3 days). On average, visits were 1 week apart (M = 7.7 days,
range 3 to 14 days). There were 28 boys and 24 girls. Parents identified their in-
fants as White (52%), African-American (15%), Hispanic (19%), Asian (2%), and
other (12%). An additional 20 infants began the study but were not included in the
final sample because they only participated in one visit (n = 10), did not complete a
habituation task due to distress (n = 4), or because of an experimental error in the
procedure (n = 6).

Procedure and Measures

Infants visited the lab for two sessions. On each visit, following informed consent
procedures, the experimenter interviewed the parent about the infants’ point pro-
duction. Next, infants participated in a series of interactive tasks. We focus on two:
parent–child play (Visit 1) and attention following (Visit 2). Then, infants partici-
pated in a visual-habituation procedure. Two infants participated in the visual- ha-
bituation procedure before the other tasks because of scheduling conflicts. The
data for these infants did not differ from the rest of the sample, so they were in-
cluded in the analyses. The interactive tasks took place in a playroom separate
from the habituation procedure.

Coders were unaware of an infant’s pattern of responses during the habituation
procedure. For all tasks, interobserver reliability was calculated by having a sec-
ond observer code all infants or a randomly selected group.

140

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

Measures of Social Cognition: Understanding Attentional Relations.
Two visual-habituation procedures were used to index infants’ comprehension of
the attentional relations of looking and pointing. Infants saw gaze events and point-
ing events on alternate visits. For gaze understanding, infants viewed events in
which a presenter looked at one of two toys (Figure 2). For point understanding, in-
fants viewed a very similar event, in which the presenter both looked at and pointed
to one of the toys (Figure 2). Infants saw the same presenter on each visit. The ha-
bituation procedures were modeled after Woodward (2003) and Woodward and
Guajardo (2002). Each infant was randomly assigned to a condition that included
three factors: (a) visit, which type of events they saw on their first visit (those con-
taining gaze alone or those containing gaze and pointing), (b) type, which type of
event they saw on the first test trial (new object or new side), and (c) goal, which
toy was the target of the actor’s action in habituation (ball or teddy bear). In all,
eight conditions were approximately evenly distributed across the sample.

Apparatus.

In the habituation procedure, the infant sat on his or her parent’s
lap inside a black curtained booth facing a puppet stage about 24 in. away. The par-
ent was instructed to look down at the infant, rather than at the experimental events,
and not to talk or direct the infant’s attention in any way once the screen was low-
ered. The stage floor was a narrow table covered with black cloth. It held two black
3-in. pedestals spaced 13 in. apart, equidistant from the center. A toy was affixed to
the top of each pedestal. On the pedestal to the infant’s right sat a white teddy bear
wearing a maroon sweater. The pedestal to the infant’s left held a multi-colored
ball. The actor sat behind the stage, so that only her upper body and face were seen;
the lower part of her arms and hands remained on her lap, except during the point-
ing events. She wore a red long-sleeved shirt. A camera protruded from a small
hole in the wall behind the actor to record the infant’s patterns of looking. A second

FIGURE 2 Sample habituation and test events.

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIVENESS

141

video camera captured the infant’s view of the events. A white muslin screen was
raised to hide the stage from the infant’s view between trials.

Procedure. At the start of each trial, the screen was lowered and then the ac-
tor made eye contact with the infant and said “Hi”. Next, she said, “Look,” and
turned to look at one of the two toys. For the pointing events, she pointed to the toy,
contacting it with her index finger, while she turned to look at it. The actor re-
mained still in this position (i.e., looking at, pointing to the toy) until the end of the
trial. The infant’s attention to the display was coded once the actor was in this final
static pose. The trial ended when the infant looked away from the display for 2 con-
secutive sec. The habituation criterion was a 50% decrement in attention, on the
basis of the sum of the first three habituation trials. When the infant looked less
than half of this sum over three consecutive trials, he or she met the criterion.
Therefore, every infant saw at least 6 trials. If an infant failed to meet this criterion
after 14 trials, the habituation phase was ended, and the infant then continued in the
procedure.

Following habituation, one additional trial of the habituation event was pre-
sented. This baseline trial provided an unbiased estimate of attention at the end of
habituation. Then, before beginning the test trials, the actor reversed the location of
the toys while the screen hid the stage from the infant’s view. The test events were
the exactly the same as those seen in habituation, except that the location of the ob-
jects and target object of the actor varied. There were 3 pairs of alternating trials.
On new side trials, the actor looked (or looked and pointed) at the same toy as dur-
ing habituation, turning to a new location to do so. On new object trials, the actor
looked (or looked and pointed) toward the other toy, which sat on the same side of
the stage that she had previously turned toward.

A trained observer coded the infant’s looking behavior on-line via a monitor.
An infant was classified as looking at the events when his or her gaze fell within a
triangle defined by endpoints at the top of the actor’s head and the outer edge of
each of the toys. The observer could not see the experimental events and was un-
aware of the condition assignment of the infant. She used a custom software pack-
age (Pinto, 1994) that recorded infant’s looking with the press of a button.

Reliability. Every infant was coded from video by a second observer, who
was unaware of the condition assignment. Observers were coded as agreeing if
they identified the same look away from the display as ending the trial. The pri-
mary and secondary observers agreed on the endings of 95% (range 75–100%) of
the test trials for the gaze events, and they agreed on 92% (range 75–100%) for
pointing events. Although there were few disagreements, it was possible that the
disagreements favored the hypothesis that infants would look longer on new object
trials. To test for this possibility, disagreements were categorized as favoring the
hypothesis (i.e., beeping late on new object trials, beeping early on new side trials)

142

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

or going against the hypothesis. Disagreements did not favor the hypothesis for ei-
ther the gaze events, X2 (1, n = 15) = .80, p = .37, or the pointing events, X2 (1, n =
22) = 1.00, p = .99.1

Measures of Social Responsiveness

Point production. To determine whether an infant produced object-directed
points, the experimenter administered a brief interview at each visit. She asked the
parent whether the infant produced a well-formed point gesture (index finger ex-
tended, other fingers curled back), and if so whether the infant directed this gesture
at objects. If the parent answered both questions affirmatively, then the infant was
categorized as a pointer. In addition, as in the Woodward and Guajardo (2002)
study, if an infant produced a well-formed point that was clearly directed at a dis-
tant object during the visit, he or she was categorized as a pointer.

Parent–child play. To obtain a measure of shared attention, the parent was
asked to play with his or her infant, as if they were playing at home, for 10 min, fol-
lowing the procedure developed by Bakeman and Adamson (1984). For all infants,
the parent in the play session was the primary caregiver, whether that parent was
the mother (n = 50) or the father (n = 2). The parent and infant were brought into a
room containing a basket of toys which were chosen to encourage interaction be-
tween them. The dyad sat in the center of the room on the floor near the basket of
toys. An experimenter stood silently behind a video camera placed in the corner of
the room and observed the session through the viewfinder to ensure that the inter-
action was captured on film.

Videotapes of the session were digitized and coded with inGest (Aronson,
1999), using coding categories based on those of Bakeman and Adamson (Adam-
son, Bakeman, Russel, & Deckner, 1998). Two states from the Bakeman and Ad-
amson coding regime were of focal importance to our research questions: sup-
ported joint attention and coordinated joint attention. In each of these, the infant
and parent actively shared attention on an object. Supported joint attention meant
that the infant and parent were jointly engaged, but the work at sustaining this
shared attention seemed to be done by the parent. The infant did not acknowledge
the parent’s attention to the toy. Coordinated joint attention was defined as sup-
ported joint attention accompanied by the infant’s alternating gaze between the
parent and the toy(s), thus suggesting that the infant contributed to sustaining

1To control for the possibility that the actor performed differently across trials, a coder, who was un-
aware of which condition infants were assigned to, guessed the test trial order by watching a videotape
of the actor. A sample of about 20% (n = 10) of the sessions for both event types was coded. The coder
was correct on 40% and 53% of the pairs for gaze and pointing events, respectively; for the first pair, she
was correct 50% and 60%. The coder’s accuracy did not differ significantly from chance, t(9) = –1.20, p
= .26, and, t(9) = .25, p = .81, respectively; first pair, t(9) = 0, p = .99 and t(9) = .61, p = .56.

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIVENESS

143

shared attention. Because the goal of the coding scheme is to capture the infants’
sustained states of attention, each state was coded only for bouts that lasted 3 sec or
more.

Two measures were derived from this coding. The first, a dichotomous mea-
sure, was whether or not infants engaged in coordinated joint attention. The sec-
ond, a continuous measure, was the proportion of time which the infant spent in ei-
ther supported or coordinated joint attention. These two categories were combined
(henceforth, called shared attention) because each reflected a time when the infant
and parent shared a common focus of attention and because, given the age of the
participants, coordinated joint attention was infrequent. Most infants (n = 38) did
not meet the criteria for coordinated joint attention, and those who did spent an av-
erage of only 2% (SD = 0.5%) of the session in this state. In contrast, all infants en-
gaged in supported joint attention and, on average, spent 24% (SD = 11%) of the
time in this state.

A second trained observer repeated the coding procedure for approximately
20% of the sessions (n = 9). Agreement on the dichotomous measure was 100%.
Agreement on the continuous measures, using Cohen’s kappa, was .70 (range
0.61-0.84); Fleiss (1981) characterized kappas between .60 and .75 as “good” and
above .75 as “excellent”.

Attention following. To assess infants’ orienting in a relatively naturalistic
interaction, we used the attention-following task developed by Carpenter et al.
(1998). The infant sat on his or her parent’s lap in a chair across the table from the
experimenter. Four targets were positioned in the playroom (see Figure 3). Two
targets were pink paper lanterns, which differed in shape, hanging from the ceiling.
The remaining two targets were stuffed animals (Bugs Bunny™ and Bob the
Builder™), positioned on a chair and tripod, respectively.

The experimenter drew the infant’s attention to center by saying, “Hi,” and/or
the infant’s name. Then, while saying, “Look,” she turned her head to look toward
a target. After 1 sec, she gazed back to the infant, exclaimed, “Wow,” or “Neat,”
and alternated her gaze between the target and the infant once more. After receiv-
ing two trials like this, the infant saw the experimenter point to the target (across
her body). Each infant received a total of four trials with unique targets: two gaze
trials, followed by two pointing trials.

The session was videotaped using a digital camera mounted to a tripod, placed
in the back corner of the room. A trained observer watched the videotape of the
session and coded whether or not the infant turned to look at the correct target. The
observer used the vocal cue of the experimenter (i.e., completion of the word
“Look”) to determine when each trial began. Infants received a score for the num-
ber of targets they followed, 0 to 4. A second coder watched the videotape and
coded the task the same way. Thirty-six infants (75% of the sample) were coded for
reliability. Average agreement was 85% (range 50–100%).

144

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

FIGURE 3 Diagram of the order and location of the targets in the attention following task.

Orienting. As another measure of orienting, the amount of time an infant spent
attending to the same target as the actor during the visual-habituation paradigm was
coded, as was done in the Woodward (2003) and Woodward and Guajardo (2002)
studies. To assess each infant’s orienting response to the actor’s attention, coders
watched the videotape for each session in real time and coded the duration of infants’
attention to each toy during the test trials. From this coding, the proportion of time
that the infant looked at the same toy as the actor versus the other toy was calculated.
A second pair of observers repeated the procedure for about 20% (n = 10) of the in-
fants. Reliability between the pairs of coders was 92% (range 80–97%) for the gaze
events and 90% (range 71–98%) for the pointing events.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Descriptive statistics for each measure are presented in Table 1. The data were ana-
lyzed in two steps. First, we analyzed infants’ responses in the visual-habituation
procedures and derived scores to index their understanding of attentional relations
for the gaze and pointing events. Second, we examined potential relations between
action understanding and social responsiveness.

Habituation Responses: Understanding
Attentional Relations

Infants met the habituation criterion for both the gaze and pointing events in an av-
erage of eight trials. One infant did not meet the habituation criterion for the gaze
events, and 4 infants did not meet it for the pointing events. When these infants

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIVENESS

145

Overview of Measures and Descriptive Statistics

TABLE 1

Measure

Action understanding
Gaze understanding
Point understanding

Social orienting

Orienting in habituation (mean)

Gaze habituation
Point habituation
Attention following

Shared attention

na

52
52

51
51
48
51
52

Whole
Sample

Pointers

Non-pointers

M

SD

Range

M

SD

M

SD

0.49
0.54

0.24
0.18

0.05–0.89
0.10–0.90

0.48
0 .59*

0.26
0.18
0.36
1.57
0.26

0.12
0.13
0.16
1.03
0.12

0.03–0.53
0–0.53
0.06–0.67

0–4

0.05–0.63

0.29
0.18
0.42
1.95
0.25

.27
.15

.11
.12
.15
.83
.12

0.49
0.51

0.25
0.18
0.32
1.32
0.26

0.22
0.20

0.12
0.13
0.16
1.08
0.13

aNumber of children out of 52 in study who had complete data for measure.
*p < .05, two-tailed t test compared to chance (.50).

were excluded from the analyses, the patterns of findings did not change. There-
fore, the following analyses included data from all 52 infants.

Infants’ attention during habituation did not differ significantly for the gaze and
pointing events. A repeated measures Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) on total look-
ing time during the habituation trials of each session with action (gaze or pointing) as
the within-subjects factor revealed no main effect, F(1, 51) = 1.55, p = .22. Following
habituation, infants responded to the change in the events during the new object and
new side trials for both the gaze and the pointing events. Paired comparisons of in-
fants’looking time during the baseline trial and the first new object and new side tri-
als revealed reliable recovery in all cases, all ps < .0003. During the test trials, infants’
attention to the events did not vary by action. A repeated measures ANOVA on total
looking time during the test trials of each session with action (gaze or pointing) as the
within-subjects factor revealed no main effect, F(1, 51) = 1.45, p = .23.

For the focal data analyses, we derived a single measure for each of the habitua-
tion tasks. These measures, gaze understanding and point understanding, were
proportional scores calculated by dividing the time looking to the new object event
by the total time looking to the new side event and the new object event. These
scores were selected because they capture the primary measure of interest, infants’
selective attention to a change in the object of the agent’s attention, a measure that
has been found to be related to a social response (pointing) in earlier studies
(Woodward & Guajardo, 2002), and because they are not conflated with other
measures such as overall levels of attention.2 However, preliminary analyses re-

2Secondary analyses revealed no significant correlations between the measures of habituation (i.e.,
number of test trials to habituate, total habituation time, proportion decrement in looking across trials)
and the measures of action understanding or the measures of social responsiveness.

146

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

vealed infants’ attention tapered off across trials. Means (with standard deviations
in parentheses) for the average looking time for the first and third pairs of the gaze
events were 7.46 (4.28) and 5.83 (7.53), respectively, and for the pointing events
were 10.65 (5.91) and 4.81 (2.45), respectively. Therefore, gaze understanding
and point understanding scores were calculated using the first test trial pair. These
scores could be interpreted as an infant’s preference for the events that contained a
change in the actor-object relation. A score greater than .50 indicated that an infant
showed a preference for the new object event over the new side event, and this was
taken as evidence of understanding the attentional relation implied by the action.
The action understanding scores did not vary reliably as a function of the type of
action infants viewed, the order in which infants received the gaze and point proce-
dures, or the particular experimental configuration to which they had been assigned.
An ANOVA with action (gaze vs. pointing) as the within-subjects factor, visit (gaze
or pointing events on the first visit), goal (ball or teddy bear in habituation), and type
(or new side test event given first) as between-subjects factors, revealed no signifi-
cant main effects or interactions. There was a positive, but nonsignificant, correla-
tion between gaze understanding and point understanding, r = .24, p = .09.

For neither the gaze nor the pointing events did infants show a reliable prefer-
ence as a group for the new object trial over the new side trial. That is, their action
understanding scores did not significantly differ from chance (.50) for gaze, t(51) =
–.39, p = .70, or for pointing, t(51) = 1.50, p = .14. These findings were consistent
with prior studies of infants at this age (Phillips, Wellman, & Spelke, 2002; Sodian
& Thoermer, 2004; Woodward, 2003; Woodward & Guajardo, 2002). Recall that
this variability in action understanding was precisely what we wanted to explore.

Relations between Action Understanding
and Social Responsiveness

The central analyses investigated relations between the two measures of action un-
derstanding and infants’ social responsiveness, including point production, atten-
tion following, and participation in shared attention with caretakers.

One approach to this issue is to ask whether those infants who attained the highest
possible scores on the measures of social responsiveness (i.e., are those who pointed
engaged in coordinated joint attention, and who reliably followed attention) were
more likely to respond systematically in the habituation procedures. However, given
the age of our participants, few infants achieved top marks on the measures of social
responsiveness. Only 1 infant reached the top of the scale on all three measures, and
only 10 of the 52 infants achieved top scores on two of the three measures. Thus, clas-
sifying infants on the basis of a composite, categorical measure seemed likely to miss
important variation in our sample. Therefore, we considered each measure of social
responsiveness separately in the analyses. In the case of point production, we had a
dichotomous measure (infants either had begun to produce object-directed points or
had not). The measures of attention following and shared attention provided graded

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIVENESS

147

information. Therefore, we pursued analysis strategies that were appropriate for the
data, evaluating categorical differences for the pointing data, and correlational pat-
terns for the measures of attention following and shared attention.

Action Understanding and Point Production

Twenty infants, 12 girls and 8 boys, were identified as pointers by parent report (n
= 9), observation in the laboratory (n = 3), or both (n = 8). We predicted that infants
who produced object-directed points would be more likely to understand pointing
as relational than nonpointers based on Woodward and Guajardo (2002). An open
question was whether pointers would also understand gaze as relational.

Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics for the 20 pointers and 32 nonpointers.
In contrast to Woodward and Guajardo (2002), pointers were significantly older
than nonpointers, t(50) = 3.59, p < .001. On average, pointers were 10 months 13
days, although nonpointers were 9 months 27 days. However, age was not signifi-
cantly correlated with gaze or point understanding, r = –.11, p = .45, and r = .07, p
= .61, respectively. There was no difference between pointers’ and nonpointers’ ha-
bituation patterns. To test whether infants’ understanding of pointing as relational
was related to their own production of object-directed points, we conducted an
ANOVA with point understanding as the dependent variable, pointing status (pro-
ducing or not producing object-directed points), type (new object or new side test
event given first), and goal (ball or teddy bear in habituation) as independent vari-
ables, and age as a covariate.3 There was a significant interaction between pointing
status and goal, F(1, 52) = 4.56, p = .04, and no other reliable effects.

3To rule out age as an explanation for the effect of point production on point understanding, we con-
ducted an alternative analysis after reducing the sample’s age range. This eliminated 15 younger infants
(14 nonpointers, 1 pointer), and 1 older pointer. The remaining 19 girls and 17 boys had an average age
of 10;11. Pointers’ (n = 18) age (M = 10;13, range 9;2–10;29) did not differ from nonpointers’ (n = 18)
age (M = 10;8, 9;27 - 10;29), t(34) = -1.55, p = .13. Point understanding scores were significantly above
chance for the pointers, t(17) = 3.47, p < .005, but not for the nonpointers, t(17) = –.57, p = .58. Gaze un-
derstanding scores did not differ significantly from chance for either group (ts < 1.00). Pointers’ scores
were significantly greater than nonpointers’ for point understanding, t(34) = 2.51, p < .05, but not for
gaze understanding, t(34) = .30, p = .76.

To explore this interaction, we conducted post hoc ANOVAs separately on the pointer and
nonpointer groups. Point understanding was entered as the dependent variable, with goal (ball or teddy
bear in habituation) as the dependent variable, and age as a covariate. For the pointers, there was no sig-
nificant main effect of goal. For the nonpointers, there was a significant effect of goal, F(1, 32) = 4.78, p
= .04. Post hoc comparisons of pairs revealed a mean difference of .15 (SE = 0.07), p = .04; nonpointers
who saw the teddy bear in habituation had higher point understanding scores than nonpointers who saw
the ball in habituation, 0.57 (SD = 0.18) and 0.42 (SD = 0.20), respectively. Planned comparisons
against chance (.50) revealed that pointers looked reliably longer on new object compared to new side
trials, t(19) = 2.56, p = 0.02. Nonpointers did not differ from chance as a group, t(31) = 0.21, p = 0.83, or
when divided into the groups that saw the teddy bear versus the ball as the goal object, t(18) = 1.70, p =
0.11 and t(12) = –1.55, p = 0.15, respectively.

148

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

A parallel set of analyses was carried out with gaze understanding as the de-
pendent variable. An ANOVA with pointing status, type (new object or new side
test event given first), and goal (ball or teddy bear in habituation) as independent
variables, and age as a covariate, revealed no significant main effects or interac-
tions. Neither pointers nor nonpointers differed from chance in their responding on
new object versus new side trials for the gaze events.

These results replicated the findings of Woodward and Guajardo (2002) in find-
ing that infants who produced object-directed points were more likely than
nonpointers to represent observed points in terms of the relation between the agent
and the object. Notably, this effect was limited to point understanding; pointers did
not differ from nonpointers on the gaze understanding measure. Given that point-
ers did not demonstrate an understanding of gaze, their performance on point un-
derstanding cannot be attributed to more sophisticated responses overall on the vi-
sual-habituation tasks. Instead, pointers’ performance on the point-understanding
task seems to reflect knowledge that is specific to pointing.

Action Understanding, Shared Attention
and Attention Following

We next considered relations between action understanding and the continuous
measures tapping attention following and shared attention with caretakers by en-
tering these measures into an exploratory factor analysis. Because our sample size
was relatively small for this type of analysis, we kept the number of factors to a
minimum. We separately entered the gaze-understanding and point-understanding
scores from the habituation procedures. For the measures of social responsiveness,
we entered the attention following, orienting (to the actor’s gaze, point during the
habituation procedure), and shared attention (degree of engagement in shared at-
tention with the caretaker during parent–child play).4 We also included age (in-
fants’ average age across visits) to determine whether it explained significant vari-
ance in these measures. Therefore, in total, we entered six factors for 52
participants and had a subjects-to-variable ratio of 8.5, which is above the mini-
mum rule of 5 (Bryant & Yarnold, 1995) but below the ideal of 10:1 (Nunnally,
1978). We did not include point production in this analysis because it was
operationalized as a dichotomous variable.

Factor analysis provided a way to test whether correlations between different
measures of social responsiveness and social cognition reflected a general pattern,
or instead distinct factors. By including both measures of action understanding, we

4Orienting was an average of gaze orienting and point orienting because they were positively re-
lated, rs = 0.26, p = .08, after removing two outliers who were greater than 2 standard deviations above
the mean for gaze orienting; when separate analyses were conducted with gaze orienting and point ori-
enting the results did not change.

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIVENESS

TABLE 2

Correlations Among the Measures

Measure

1

1. Age
2. Gaze understanding
3. Point understanding
4. Orienting in habituation
5. Attention following
6. Shared attention

2

–.11

3

.07
.24

4

.22
.04
.14

5

.20
–.15
.12
.37*

149

6

.12
.37*
–.10
–.06
–.19

Note. For correlations including attention following and orienting in habituation, n = 51. For the

correlation between attention following and orienting in habituation, n = 50.

N = 52.
*p < .01.

could see whether they shared the same patterns of relations with the measures of
social responsiveness, or whether the patterns seemed to be action specific. In con-
trast to regression, factor analysis did not require us to specify an outcome vari-
able. Therefore, this relation could be explored without presupposing the develop-
mental sequence of these behaviors.

For each measure, scores were standardized with respect to the mean of the
sample.5 Correlations among the measures are presented in Table 2. The measures
were entered into a factor analysis (principal components) with Varimax rotation.
The analysis yielded three factors that accounted for 69% of the variance in the
model (Table 3). The measures that reflected infants’ social orienting (orienting,
attention following) loaded positively on a single factor (Factor 1) with age (.70)
that accounted for 26% of the variance. The measures that represented infants’ ac-
tion understanding (gaze understanding, point understanding) loaded positively on
a separate factor (Factor 3) that accounted for 21% of the variance. The other factor
(Factor 2) included measures from both components, shared attention and gaze un-
derstanding, which both loaded positively and accounted for 22% of the variance.

The solution with three factors was produced on the basis of the amount of vari-
ance accounted for in the data by statistically independent factors. Therefore, we
can interpret these factors as unique contributors to infants’ performance across
tasks. It is interesting to note that these independent factors accounted for similar

5Mean substitutions were used to replace missing data points for two infants (one for attention fol-
lowing, the other for orienting in habituation). When these infants were excluded from the analysis in-
stead, the pattern of findings did not change. One infant was excluded from the analysis because the
amount of time he spent in shared attention was greater than 3 standard deviations above the mean. This
inflated the relation between shared attention and the other variables within the factors. When he was
excluded, the overall pattern of findings (i.e., factor structure, variance) did not change.

150

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

TABLE 3

Factor Analysis of the Measures

Factor Loading

Measure

Factor 1

Factor 2

Factor 3

Age
Gaze understanding
Point understanding
Orienting in habituation
Attention following
Shared attention
Factor statistics

Eigenvalue
Variance explained (%)

0.70

0.72
0.71

1.56
26

0.52

0.90

1.32
22

0.70
0.80

1.24
21

Note. The three factor solution was selected on the basis of a cutoff criterion of eigenvalues

greater than or equal to 1. Factor loadings under .40 were suppressed.

amounts of variance in the data, which suggests that they weighed relatively
equally into infants’ performance.

Factor 1, which we refer to as “Social Orienting”, did not include either mea-
sure of social cognition. This factor confirmed that our two measures of social ori-
enting, one taken from infants’ propensity to follow the habituation actor’s atten-
tion,
the other from a more naturalistic procedure, each tapped the same
underlying ability. Further, our findings suggest that this ability is independent of
infants’ understanding of gaze and pointing as object-directed actions. Follow-up
analyses confirmed this finding, even when infants’ responses were considered
within an action: There were no reliable correlations between gaze orienting and
the gaze-understanding task, rs = 0.07, p = .64, and point orienting and the
point-understanding task, rs = 0.12, p = .42. Thus, in keeping with prior findings
(Woodward, 2003; Woodward & Guajardo, 2002), these findings suggest that gaze
and point following are not correlated with action understanding at this age. The
emergence of social orienting and action understanding as independent factors
argues against the assumption that gaze and point following are direct indexes of
action understanding.

Factor 3, which we refer to as “Action Understanding,” did not include any mea-
sure of social responsiveness, but it did include the two measures of action under-
standing. This factor provides stronger evidence for the relation between gaze and
point understanding than was evident in the correlational analysis. To take a closer
look at this relation, we classified infants into groups, on the basis of whether their
preference for the new object trial fell above or below chance (.50) for each action
(Table 4). The chi-square distribution of infants’ proportion scores approached sig-
nificance, χ2 (1, N = 52) = 3.07, p = .08. There was a trend for more infants to un-

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIVENESS

151

Distribution of Infants’ Action Understanding Scores

TABLE 4

Point Habituation

< .50
> .50
Total

< .50

14
13
27

Gaze habituation

> .50

7
18
25

Total

21
31
52

derstand pointing than gaze as relational. These results suggest that infants may
have more readily noted the relation between agent and object for the pointing
events than for the gaze events. Given that the pointing events contained two cues,
gaze and pointing, as well as a concrete connection between the actor and the ob-
ject, more infants may have interpreted the pointing events as relational because
they contained richer information.

Furthermore, there was an asymmetry in the relation between these scores,
which suggests that point understanding may be a facilitator of understanding
gaze. Of the 31 infants who performed above chance on the point-understanding
task, 18 of them performed above chance on the gaze-understanding task, p = .48.
In contrast, of the 25 infants who performed above chance on the gaze-
understanding task, 18 of
them performed above chance on the point-
understanding task, p < .05.

The remaining factor, Factor 2, produced a novel finding, documenting a rela-
tion between a particular measure of social responsiveness, Shared Attention, and
a particular measure of social cognition, Gaze Understanding. To investigate this
relation further, we considered infants in the upper and lower third of the
distribution in shared attention. The group in the upper third spent between 30 and
63% of their time in shared attention, and the group in the lower third spent be-
tween 5 and 19% of their time in this state. On average, the 18 infants in the upper
third group, 8 girls and 10 boys, spent 39% (SD = 9%) of the time in shared atten-
tion. The infants in the lower third group, 7 girls and 10 boys, spent 13% (SD = 5%)
of their time on average in this state. The two groups did not differ significantly in
age, t(33) = 0.48, p = 0.64.

Compared to the lower third group, infants in the upper third group scored sig-
nificantly higher on gaze understanding, 0.41 (SD = 0.21) and 0.58 (SD = 0.22), re-
spectively, t(33) = 2.26, p = .03. This effect did not carry over to point understand-
ing, t(33) = 0.77, p = .45, indicating that shared attention systematically related to
infants’ understanding of the actor-object relation of the gaze events, but not to the
pointing events (Figure 4). However, infants in the upper third group were not
above chance on the gaze-understanding score, t(17) = 1.49, p = .15. The mean for
infants in the lower third group fell below chance, but it did not differ reliably from

152

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

FIGURE 4 Comparison of infants’ performance on the action-understanding tasks split by
their amount of shared attention in parent–child play.

chance t(16) = –1.71, p = .11. It seems likely that if we had tested slightly older in-
fants, who would have had higher levels of shared attention, then those at the upper
end of the distribution would have responded more systematically to the habitua-
tion events. Further research is needed to test this possibility.

GENERAL DISCUSSION

Two assumptions have been prevalent in the recent study of infant social cognition:
first, that infants’ social responsiveness directly reflects their social understanding,
and second, that emerging conceptions of intentional action are monolithic. This
study is the first we know of to directly test these assumptions by independently in-
vestigating infants’ understanding of intentional relations and their social re-
sponses. Our findings provide new insights into infants’ emerging ability to repre-
sent intentional relations and the relation between this ability and developments in
social behavior. They indicate that emerging social cognition correlates with some,
but not all, socially functional behaviors. They further suggest that relations be-
tween action knowledge and social responsiveness may, at least initially, be local
and circumscribed.

An initial question was whether infants would be equally sensitive to the in-
tentional structure of two different actions, looking and pointing. Prior findings
indicate that between 9 and 12 months of age infants begin to understand each of
these actions as implying a relation between an agent and the object of her atten-
tion (Phillips et al., 2002; Sodian & Thoermer, 2004; Woodward, 2003; Wood-
ward & Guajardo, 2002), but no study had directly compared understanding of
these two actions within the same infant. Our findings were consistent with prior

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIVENESS

153

research in that, as a group, the 10-month old infants we tested did not respond
systematically to the gaze or pointing events in the habituation procedure. There
was a marginal positive correlation between infants’ responses in the two proce-
dures, although this relation was more evident in the factor analysis. Categorical
analyses suggested that infants’ point understanding may be a prerequisite for
gaze understanding. Of those infants who responded above chance for the gaze
events, most responded in the same way for pointing, but those who responded
systematically for pointing were evenly divided in their responses to gaze. Thus,
our findings suggest that infants’ understanding of gaze and pointing are related
in development. Even so, our subsequent analyses revealed that these two as-
pects of action knowledge are also related to distinct aspects of social respon-
siveness.

For both the gaze and pointing events, one goal of this research was to deter-
mine whether infants’ understanding of actions as relational could be distinguished
from their propensity to orient in response to viewing these actions. Infants’ gaze
and point following is often assumed to reflect an understanding of the intentional
relations at hand. Our findings suggest otherwise. Infants did shift their own atten-
tion in response to others’ actions, both while viewing the habituation events and in
the more naturalistic assessment of gaze and point following. However, these ori-
enting responses were unrelated to infants’ sensitivity to the intentional structure
of the habituation events.

Despite the lack of correlation with infants’ habituation responses, the measures
of orienting were related to one another. There was a significant correlation be-
tween infants’ orienting to the actor in habituation and their orienting to the experi-
menter in the more naturalistic task. These two measures of orienting positively
contributed to the same factor in the factor analysis. This suggests that both mea-
sures of social orienting accurately reflected infants’ propensity to respond to the
attention of another. Neither measure loaded on the same factor as infants’ action
understanding in the factor analysis. Collectively, these findings strengthen the ev-
idence against the assumption that the traditional estimates of infants’ action un-
derstanding, gaze and point following, reflect understanding the attentional rela-
tions of actions.

It is possible that the infants’ orienting responses become more closely linked
with their analysis of intentional relations at later points in development. For ex-
ample, older infants are able to modify their orienting responses when an adult’s
gaze is blocked by a blindfold or barrier (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2002; Butler, Caron,
& Brooks, 2000; Caron, Butler, & Brooks, 2002). These findings suggest that in-
fants intend to see what the experimenter is seeing, and therefore have some
knowledge about the relational nature of gaze events. These more intelligent gaze
following responses support arguments outlined by Moore and colleagues (Barresi
& Moore, 1996; Corkum & Moore, 1998; Moore & Corkum, 1994) that social re-
sponses become infused with social cognition early in development.

154

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

Although infants’ action understanding was not related to their propensity to
follow gaze or points, it was related to other aspects of social responsiveness. Our
analyses revealed independent clusters of relations with point understanding and
gaze understanding. These clusters suggest that acquisition of knowledge about
pointing and gaze events may follow different trajectories and relate to different
kinds of social experiences. In particular, we found two specific links between in-
fants’ social cognition and social responsiveness. The first was a relation between
point production and point understanding, and the second was a relation between
shared attention and gaze understanding. In each case, an aspect of social respon-
siveness was related to one kind of action knowledge, but not to the other. Follow-
ing, we review these links and discuss possible explanations for them. Because we
are working with concurrent data, we cannot be certain about the direction of cau-
sation that may account for the correlations we observed. Indeed, we think it is
very likely that relations between social cognition and social responsiveness are
bidirectional. Even so, our findings shed new light on these relations and highlight
a number of questions for further study.

Infants who pointed were more likely to interpret pointing as relational than in-
fants who did not yet point. This relation was not accounted for by age. This aspect
of our findings replicates a prior study (Woodward & Guajardo, 2002). Our find-
ings provide new insight into this relation because they indicate it is action specific
at this point in development. Pointers were no more able than nonpointers to re-
cover the relational structure of the gaze events.

There are several possible explanations for the positive relation between point
production and point understanding. One possibility is that infants learn the func-
tion of pointing by observing others’ pointing and are then motivated to begin
pointing themselves. Another possibility, and one that we think is more likely to be
true, is that infants begin to point for other reasons, and through pointing them-
selves, become aware of the attentional relation this action implies in others. Some
researchers have suggested that infants initially point as an expression of their own
attention, rather than as a symbol for others (Bates et al., 1979; Desrochers et al.,
1995; Schaffer, 1984; Werner & Kaplan, 1963). If this is the case, then the point
gesture might function as an overt signal of an attentional relation that could en-
able infants to interpret other people’s point gestures. These possibilities empha-
size the causal role of observing or producing a specific action, pointing, in acquir-
ing action knowledge. Further, they are consistent with the proposal that the root of
intentional understanding comes from aligning self and other (Meltzoff & Gopnik,
1993; Tomasello, 1999). Because we do not know whether infants begin pointing
first or understand pointing as relational first, we can only speculate about these
possibilities. Longitudinal studies are needed to address this issue.

The second correlation among social cognition and social responsiveness
concerned the relation between shared attention and gaze understanding. These
measures were positively correlated, and this relation accounted for a significant

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIVENESS

155

amount of variance in the infants’ performance. Shared attention could contrib-
ute to infants’ understanding of gaze by providing them with increased opportu-
nities to observe and participate in triadic interactions. This idea is consistent
with the theory put forth by Moore and others (Corkum & Moore, 1995) that
joint engagement leads to discovery of others’ intentions. Conversely, infants’
increase in shared attention could result from their understanding of gaze. For
example, perhaps infants who understood gaze drew their parents to play with
them by looking to them more or by using the parents’ gaze to locate a common
object of interest. Given the existence of this concurrent relationship, future
studies can investigate these relations over time and thereby begin to isolate the
causal relations involved.

To summarize, we found different patterns of correlations with social respon-
siveness for point and gaze understanding. These findings indicate that infants’
pockets of knowledge about actions may be related to different aspects of experi-
ence. These findings raise the possibility that concepts of intention, although uni-
fied at some point in life, do not begin that way. If we had found that infants’ under-
standing of gaze and point were significantly correlated and that this unified action
knowledge was related to some aspect of social responsiveness, we might argue
that infants’ initial concepts of intention are inclusive of different attentional rela-
tions. However, the action-specific relations we found better support the idea that
infants’ understanding of referential actions starts out as piecemeal.

If this suggestion is correct, then it raises the question of how and when infants’
action knowledge becomes integrated. One possibility is that understanding one
action facilitates understanding the other. For example, infants might first under-
stand pointing as relational, and this knowledge could support later learning about
gaze. The findings that point and gaze understanding were moderately correlated
in our sample and that point understanding seemed to predict gaze understanding
are consistent with this possibility. If point understanding supports infants’ grow-
ing sensitivity to the relational nature of gaze, we might expect that seeing pointing
events first in our procedure would have led to more systematic responses to the
gaze events. We did not find evidence for this kind of facilitation. Infants’ re-
sponses to the gaze and pointing habituation events did not vary as a function of the
order in which they received them. However, facilitation might be evident in the
course of development over longer time scales.

By incorporating measures of social cognition into studies of infants’ social re-
sponsiveness, the bidirectional influence of infants’ achievements during this tran-
sitional period can be investigated. Examining infants’ abilities on these skills dur-
ing this transitional period of development has provided a starting point for
investigating the relation between social cognition and social responsiveness in de-
velopment and highlighted the need to do so. Accounts of social development
should take seriously the distinction and developmental relations between social
cognition and social responsiveness.

156

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Camille W. Brune and Amanda L. Woodward, Department of Psychology, Univer-
sity of Chicago.

Camille W. Brune is now at the Institute for Juvenile Research, Department of
Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago. Amanda L. Woodward is now at the
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland.

This work was supported by NICHD (HD35707) (A.L.W.) and the Harris Foun-
dation (C.W.B.). Parts of this manuscript were completed as part of the first au-
thor’s dissertation submitted to the Department of Psychology, University of Chi-
cago, and presented at the 2003 biennial meeting of the Cognitive Development
Society.

We would like to thank Jennifer Sootsman Buresh, Bradley DiTeresi, Kiley
Hamlin, and Kevin Uttich for their assistance in data collection. We also thank
Jessica Sommerville, Sydney Hans, and Lauren Wakschlag for their comments on
an earlier version of this manuscript. We are greatly indebted to the parents and in-
fants who volunteered their time to participate in the study.

REFERENCES

Adamson, L. B., Bakeman, R., Russel, C. L., & Deckner, D. F. (1998). Coding symbol-infused engage-

ment states (technical report 9). Georgia Sate University, Atlanta, Georgia.

Aronson, S. (1999). Ingest (Version 1.7). University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
Bakeman, R., & Adamson, L. B. (1984). Coordinating attention to people and objects in mother-infant

and peer-infant interaction. Child Development, 55(4), 1278–1289.

Baldwin, D. A., & Moses, L. J. (1996). The ontogeny of social information gathering. Child Develop-

ment, 67(5), 1915–1939.

Barresi, J., & Moore, C. (1996). Intentional relations and social understanding. Behavioral & Brain Sci-

ences, 19(1), 107–154.

Bates, E., Benigni, L., Bretherton, I., Camaioni, L., & Volterra, V. (1979). The emergence of symbols:

Cognition and communication in infancy. New York: Academic.

Bates, E., Camaioni, L., & Volterra, V. (1975). The acquisition of performatives prior to speech.

Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 21(3), 205–226.

Bretherton, I. (1991). Intentional communication and the development of an understanding of mind. In
D. Frye & C. Moore (Eds.), Children’s theories of mind: Mental states and social understanding (pp.
49–75). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2002). The importance of eyes: How infants interpret adult looking be-

havior. Developmental Psychology, 38(6), 958–966.

Bryant, F. B., & Yarnold, P., R. (1995). Principal components analysis and exploratory and confirma-
tory factor analysis. In L. G. Grimm & P. R. Yarnold (Eds.), Reading and understanding multivariate
statistics (pp. 99 36). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.

Butler, S. C., Caron, A. J., & Brooks, R. (2000). Infant understanding of the referential nature of look-

ing. Journal of Cognition & Development, 1(4), 359–377.

Butterworth, G., & Grover, L. (1990). Joint visual attention, manual pointing, and preverbal communi-
cation in human infancy. In M. Jeannerod (Ed.), Attention and performance 13: Motor representa-
tion and control. (pp. 605–624). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIVENESS

157

Call, J., Hare, B., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2004). ‘unwilling’ versus ‘unable’: Chimpanzees’

understanding of human intentional action. Developmental Science, 7(4), 488–498.

Caron, A. J., Butler, S., & Brooks, R. (2002). Gaze following at 12 and 14 months: Do the eyes matter?

British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 20(2), 225–240.

Carpendale, J., & Lewis, C. (2004). Constructing an understanding of the mind: The development of chil-

dren’s social understanding within social interaction. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27, 79–151.

Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social cognition, joint attention, and communica-
tive competence from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Devel-
opment, 63(4), 1–176.

Corkum, V., & Moore, C. (1995). Development of joint visual attention in infants. In C. Moore & P. J.
Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development (pp. 61–83). Hillsdale, NJ: Law-
rence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Corkum, V., & Moore, C. (1998). Origins of joint visual attention in infants. Developmental Psychol-

ogy, 34(1), 28–38.

Desrochers, S., Morissette, P., & Ricard, M. (1995). Two perceptives on pointing in infancy. In C.
Moore & P. J. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development (pp. 85–101).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Driver, J., Davis, G., Ricciardelli, P., Kidd, P., Maxwell, E., & Baron-Cohen, S. (1999). Gaze perception

triggers reflexive visuospatial orienting. Visual Cognition, 6(5), 509–540.

Fleiss, J. L. (1981). Statistical methods for rates and proportions (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley.
Hains, S., & Muir, D. (1996). Infant sensitivity to adult eye direction. Child Development, 67(5),

1940–1951.

Jaffe, J., Beatrice, B., Stanley, F., Crown, C. L., & Jasnow, M. D. (2001). Rhythms of dialogue in in-
fancy: Coordinated timing in development. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Devel-
opment, 66(2), vi–131.

Kaye, K. (1982). The mental and social life of babies: How parents create persons. Chicago: University

of Chicago Press.

Klin, A., Schultz, R., & Cohen, D. (2000). Theory of mind in action: Developmental perspectives on so-
cial neuroscience. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, & D. Cohen (Eds.), Understanding other
minds: Perspectives from developmental neuroscience (2nd ed., pp. 357–388). Oxford, England: Ox-
ford University Press.

Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., Henning, A., Striano, T., & Tomasello, M. (2004). Twelve-month-olds

point to share attention and interest. Developmental Science, 7(3), 297–207.

Meltzoff, A. N., & Gopnik, A. (1993). The role of imitation in understanding persons and developing a
theory of mind. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Understanding other
minds: Perspectives from autism (pp. 335–366). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.

Moore, C. (1999). Intentional relations and triadic interactions. In P. D. Zelazo, J. W. Astington, & D. R.
Olson (Eds.), Developing theories of intention: Social understanding and self-control (pp. 43–61).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Moore, C., & Corkum, V. (1994). Social understanding at the end of the first year of life. Developmental

Review, 14(4), 349–372.

Moore, C., & Corkum, V. (1998). Infant gaze following based on eye direction. British Journal of De-

velopmental Psychology, 16(4), 495–503.

Moore, C., & D’Entremont, B. (2001). Developmental changes in pointing as a function of attentional

focus. Journal of Cognition & Development, 2(2), 109–129.

Mundy, P. (2003). Annotation: The neural basis of social impairments in autism: The role of the dorsal
medial-frontal cortex and anterior cingulate system. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry &
Allied Disciplines, 44(6), 793–809.

Nunnally, J. C. (1978). Psychometric theory (2 ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Phillips, A., Wellman, H. M., & Spelke, E. S. (2002). Infants’ ability to connect gaze and emotional ex-

pression to intentional action. Cognition, 85(1), 53–78.

158

BRUNE AND WOODWARD

Pinto, J. (1994). Macxhab. Stanford, CA.
Povinelli, D. J. (2001). On the possibilities of detecting intentions prior to understanding them. In B. F.
Malle, L. J. Moses, & D. A. Baldwin (Eds.), Intentions and intentionality: Foundations of social cog-
nition (pp. 225–248). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Povinelli, D. J., & Eddy, T. J. (1996). What young chimpanzees know about seeing. Monographs of the

Society for Research in Child Development, 61(3), 1–189.

Ricciardelli, P., Bricolo, E., Aglioti, S. M., & Chelazzi, L. (2002). My eyes want to look where your
eyes are looking: Exploring the tendency to imitate another individual’s gaze. Neuroreport: For
Rapid Communication of Neuroscience Research, 13(17), 2259–2264.

Scaife, M., & Bruner, J. (1975). The capacity for joint visual attention in the infant. Nature, 253(5489),

265–266.

Schaffer, H. R. (1984). The child’s entry into a social world. Orlando: Academic Press.
Sodian, B., Schoeppner, B., & Metz, U. (2004). Do infants apply the principle of rational action to hu-

man agents? Infant Behavior & Development, 27(1), 31–41.

Sodian, B., & Thoermer, C. (2004). Infants’ understanding of looking, pointing, and reaching as cues to

goal-directed action. Journal of Cognition & Development, 5(3), 289–316.

Tomasello, M. (1995). Joint attention as social cognition. In C. Moore & P. J. Dunham (Eds.), Joint at-
tention: Its origins and role in development (pp. 61–83). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associ-
ates, Inc.

Tomasello, M. (1999). Having intentions, understanding intentions, and understanding communicative
intentions. In P. D. Zelazo & J. W. Astington (Eds.), Developing theories of intention: Social under-
standing and self-control (pp. 63–75). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Tomasello, M., Call, J., & Hare, B. (2003). Chimpanzees understand psychological states—the ques-

tion is which ones and to what extent. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(4), 153–156.

Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005). Understanding and sharing inten-
tions: The ontogeny and phylogeny of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28,
675–735.

Travis, L., Sigman, M., & Ruskin, E. (2001). Links between social understanding and social behavior in

verbally able children with autism. Journal of Autism & Developmental Disorders, 31(2), 119–130.

Trevarthen, C. (1977). Descriptive analyses of infant communicative behaviour. In H. R. Schaffer (Ed.),

Studies in mother-infant interaction (pp. 227–270). New York: Academic.

Tronick, E. Z. (1989). Emotions and emotional communication in infants. American Psychologist,

44(2), 112–119.

Werner, H., & Kaplan, B. (1963). Symbol formation. New York: Wiley.
Whiten, A. (1994). Evolving a theory of mind: The nature of non-verbal mentalism in other primates. In
S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, & D. Cohen (Eds.), Understanding other minds: Perspectives
from autism (pp. 367–396). London: Oxford University Press.

Woodward, A. L. (2003). Infants’ developing understanding of the link between looker and object. De-

velopmental Science, 6(3), 297–311.

Woodward, A. L., & Guajardo, J. J. (2002). Infants’ understanding of the point gesture as an ob-

ject-directed action. Cognitive Development, 17(1), 1061–1084.

