British Journal of Developmental Psychology (2000 ), 18, 479–498 Printed in Great Britain
# 2000 The British Psychological Society

479

Infants’ visual preference for sex-congruent

babies, children, toys and activities:

A longitudinal study

Anne Campbell,* Louisa Shirley and Charles Heywood

Durham University, UK

Charles Crook

Loughborough University, UK

their behaviour. This

Sex differences in social behaviour emerge as early as 2 years of age and gender
schema theorists have suggested that preverbal infants possess ‘tacit’ knowledge of
gender which informs
study examined sex-congruent
preferences using a visual preference paradigm in four domains (babies, children,
toys, activities) in a longitudinal study of infants aged 3, 9 and 18 months. At
3 months, infants showed a marginally significant preference for same-sex babies
driven principally by males. Sex-congruent toy preference was found among males at
ages 9 and 18 months. Both sexes preferred masculine activity styles but this effect
was significantly stronger among males than females. Gender schema theory requires
gendered self-concept as a precursor to sex-congruent preference. Infants did not
recognize themselves from photographs at any of the ages tested. By 18 months
approximately two thirds of infants showed self-recognition on the rouge test.
However, at none of the ages and in none of the domains tested was self-recognition
related to sex-congruent preference. Cross-domain consistency of preference was not
found. There was evidence of some stability of preference within domains between
the ages of 9 and 18 months and this stability was very marked for activity
preference.

Sex differences in children’s behaviour are commonly ascribed to the development of a
gender schema that guides their behaviour in sex-congruent ways (Bem, 1981; Martin &
Halverson, 1981). According to gender schema theory, children categorize gender-
salient stimuli (people, toys, activities ) as ‘for girls’ or ‘for boys’ and, when sex-of-self is
incorporated into the gender schema, this categorization guides selective attention to
and preference for sex-congruent stimuli. The gender schema allows for efficient
learning and recall of same-sex information (Ruble & Stangor, 1986; Stangor & Ruble,
1987), formation of inferences about unfamiliar children based on gender (Gelman,

* Requests for reprints should be addressed to Dr Anne Campbell, Department of Psychology,
University of Durham, Science Laboratories, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK (e-mail:
a.c.campbell@durham.ac.uk ).

480

Anne Campbell et al.

Collman, & Maccoby, 1986; Haugh, Hoffman, & Cowan, 1980; Martin, 1989) and
engagement in sex-congruent behaviours (Fagot & Leinbach, 1989).

As Martin and Halverson (1981, p. 112) note: ‘Children who cannot identify gender
. . . would not be expected to act according to schemas that have yet to be formed.’
Given the importance accorded to the formation of gender categories, research has
addressed the age at which children attain important cognitive milestones in this area.
Despite Kohlberg’s (1966) emphasis upon gender constancy (the understanding that sex
remains constant despite superficial changes in appearance) as the basis for sex-typing,
studies suggest that this form of conservation is not achieved until between the ages of 4
and 7 years (Ruble & Martin, 1998). However, Martin and Halverson (1981) have
argued that gender labelling alone is sufficient to form a basis for gender schema.
Gender labelling has been examined in a variety of ways. One technique invites children
to identify the correct photo when given a verbal instruction to point to one sex or the
other (Etaugh, Grinnell, & Etaugh, 1989; Fagot & Leinbach, 1989; Huston, 1983;
Weinraub, Clements, Sockloff, Ethridge, & Myers, 1984). Accurate performance appears
at about 30 months on these tasks. In a photo sorting task, children are asked to sort
pictures sequentially into two boxes when no verbal reference is made to the sex of the
stimuli (Weinraub et al., 1984). The majority of children at age 36 months, but not
earlier, are able to perform this task. The later onset of this ability may relate to Gelman,
Collman, and Maccoby’s (1986) finding that the ability to categorize an object by using
property information (such as gender) occurs developmentally later than the ability to
infer properties of an object when the category is given. Children can identify gender
when prompted to do so more easily than they infer gender category membership by
themselves. Overall then, children demonstrate the ability to label gender between the
age of 2.5 and 3 years (Ruble & Martin, 1998).

This is problematic for gender schema theory since a number of sex differences begin to
emerge prior to this age. Children demonstrate a marked behavioural preference for their
own sex by the age of about 24 months – before they can reliably label the sex of others
(Fagot, 1985; Hoyenga & Hoyenga, 1993; Maccoby & Jacklin, 1987). Sex differences in
toy choice have been found at 14–18 months of age (Caldera, Huston, & O’Brien, 1989),
despite the fact that children cannot accurately assess whether a toy is more suitable for a
girl or a boy until after the age of 2 years (Blakemore, LaRue, & Olejnik, 1979; Perry,
White, & Perry, 1984). Indeed sex differences in toy choice occur before children can
accurately label others as male or female (Fagot, Leinbach & Hagan, 1986; Weinraub, et
al., 1984). There are significant differences in activity level and gross motor behaviour
between girls and boys (Eaton & Enns, 1986). At about 1 year, boys exhibit more assertive
reactions to toy disputes, are more vigorous, have higher activity levels and exhibit more
gross motor activity than do girls (Brooks & Lewis, 1974; Freedman, 1974; Goldberg &
Lewis, 1969; Kohnstamm, Bates, & Rothbart, 1989; Messer & Lewis, 1972). In
childhood, boys engage in more chasing and rough-and-tumble play (Humphreys &
Smith, 1984). Propulsion or explosive motion has been found to be more characteristic of
boys than girls (Benenson, Liroff, Pascal, & Cioppa, 1997).

If gender schema theory is correct, then children must be able to reliably discriminate
the sexes much earlier than these verbally mediated tasks suggest. To examine this
possibility, researchers have used the habituation paradigm. Leinbach and Fagot (1993)
report that by the age of 1 year, 75% of infants show categorical habituation to adult male

Infants’ preference for sex-congruency

481

The visual preference paradigm offers

and female faces. They suggest that infants know more than they can tell about the gender
of others and refer to this as ‘tacit knowledge’. Recall, however, that in such studies,
infants are presented with a series of exemplars of one category (e.g. male faces ) followed
by an instance of a non-category member (e.g. a female face) and recovery from
habituation is taken as evidence of the infant’s possession of the initial category. It is
likely that infants are capable of forming the category during the testing procedure itself
(Poulin-Dubois, Serbin, Kenyon, & Derbyshire, 1994) and, if so, the above findings
replicate data on infants’ formation of categories with a variety of non-social stimuli
(Wagner, Winner, Cicchetti, & Gardner 1981; Younger, 1985; Younger & Cohen, 1983).
the opportunity to examine infants’
spontaneous preferences for sex-typed stimuli while avoiding the possibility of cueing
or tutoring the infant. If an infant demonstrates a significant sex-typed preference over a
number of different exemplars of male and female stimuli, this preference may be based
upon an already available ‘tacit’ category of male and female. The visual preference
technique has become an important tool in understanding attentional processes in
preverbal
serial and simultaneous
presentation. In the first, the infant is presented with a series of stimuli, fixation
times to each are recorded and paired statistical comparisons are performed on the data.
In the latter, two stimuli are presented simultaneously to the infant and measures are
taken of the infant’s differential patterns of gaze during each trial. Despite the fact that
infants of 3 months are not capable of locomotion and are unable to reach for and grasp
objects, they already display systematic patterns of gaze under different stimulus
conditions (Spelke, 1985).

infants. Two paradigms are commonly used:

In a sequential visual preference paradigm, Kagan and Lewis (1965) found no
differences in duration of gaze to male and female faces for either girls or boys at age
6 months. Lewis and Brooks-Gunn (1979, Study 1) measured fixation duration when 53
infants aged between 10 and 18 months were presented with a series of pictures of same-
aged male and female infants. They found significant longer fixation times for same-sex
than for opposite-sex pictures for the group as a whole. T tests revealed that the effect
was significant for both sexes at 16–18 months (but not at 10–12 months) and for
females of both ages but not males. (Multivariate analysis of variance was not performed
so the effects of age and sex are reported independently.) Lewis and Brooks (1975), in an
earlier report of a study with identical design and participant numbers, failed to find
significant evidence of differential looking at either age or in either sex. Lewis and
Brooks-Gunn (1979, Study 2), in a replication study with extended age parameters,
found no significant same-sex preference.

Kujawski and Bower (1993) presented 20 infant viewers with films of a boy and a girl
moving around a darkened room with their joints highlighted by point-light displays.
In this way, facial and cultural cues to gender were removed and only movement cues
remained. On their first look, 10–14 month-olds demonstrated a significantly longer
first fixation on same-sex rather than opposite-sex children, but no significant sex-
preference was reported for total duration of looking.

The pattern of results is equivocal and is especially difficult to interpret because
studies vary in their use of serial or sequential presentation, the ages of participants and
their use of static and moving stimuli. Studies have focused exclusively on infants’
preferences for people at the expense of other sex-typed preferences such as toys and

482

Anne Campbell et al.

activities, yet these are the very areas in which precocious sex-typing has been noted.
Most problematic is the fact that to date no longitudinal study has been undertaken
which systematically tracks infants’ trajectory of gender-relevant visual preference over
time.

Incorporation of sex-of-self into gender schema

According to gender schema theory, gender-congruent preferences also depend upon the
incorporation of sex-of-self into the gender schema. Despite the absolute centrality of
this premise (without which sex-congruent development would be impossible), only a
few studies have examined the child’s ability to allocate pictures of him- or herself to the
appropriate gender category. When asked to sort photographs of themselves into piles of
male and female photos, 42% of 26-month-olds succeed, rising to 88% at 31 months
(Weinraub et al., 1984). When asked to describe a picture of themselves, 74% of 26-
month-olds use an appropriate gender label rising to 88% at 31 months (Weinraub et
al., 1984). In Bigelow’s (1981) study of 18–26-month-old infants, the ability to point
to a picture of themselves appeared in only some participants by the end of the age range
tested. These studies suggest that it is not until well into the third year of life that
children can reliably discriminate their own sex.

However, self-recognition may occur before this and sex-of-self may be incorporated
at a tacit or preverbal level. A critical question therefore is the age at which children
achieve the ability to recognize themselves in images, since this would be a necessary
requirement for knowing which sex they are. Mirrors and closed circuit video have been
used to measure dynamic self-recognition. Various measures of self-recognition have
been employed including self-directed behaviour (especially touching their nose in
reaction to viewing a rouge spot on it), self-naming and turning to locate an object seen
in the mirror (which presumes that self is used as a spatial referent for the object’s
location ). Bertenthal and Fischer (1978) found that the ability to locate objects occurs
before the ability to name self or direct actions to self, but Robinson, Connell,
McKenzie, and Day (1990) found that object location was independent of whether the
infant’s image was visible in the mirror, suggesting that spatial location measures are
not tapping self-recognition. Johnson (1983)
infants would display
established measures of self-recognition (e.g. self-directed behaviour and naming) in
response to a video of another infant. The only measure which was used exclusively for
self was nose-touching on the rouge test. Hence the rouge test appears to be the most
reliable indicator of self-recognition. Results suggest that mirror recognition appears
between 18 and 24 months of age (Amsterdam, 1972; Bullock & Lutkenhaus, 1990;
Loveland, 1987).

found that

At younger ages, static self-recognition has been investigated using visual preference
procedures. Lewis and Brooks (1979, Study 1), using sequential presentation, included a
picture of the infant interspersed with variety of other baby, adult and child faces.
Infants aged 10–18 months looked significantly longer at themselves than at opposite-
sex babies, but when the sample was split by sex the effect was significant for females
only. Featural self-recognition is doubtful, however, since infants showed no differences
in looking times between themselves and a same-sex baby, suggesting that they may
have viewed the self picture as simply another exemplar of the same-sex category. (Recall

Infants’ preference for sex-congruency

483

that serial presentation was used so that at no point did the infant have to ‘choose’
between self and same-sex peer.) In Study 2, which included an older age group of 21–
24-month-olds, no significant differences in looking duration were found between self
and same-sex peer or between self and opposite-sex peer. It appears unlikely, therefore,
that self-recognition occurs before the age of 2 years. However, Bahrick, Moss, and Fadil
(1996) argue for much earlier
self-recognition. They used a simultaneous visual
preference paradigm to present infants aged 3 months with paired photographs of self
and a peer (sex-unspecified ). They found that on the second (but not the first) block of
four trials infants showed a significant preference for the face of the peer. The authors
concluded that infants are able to discriminate self and other from featural information.
The present study used two measures of self-recognition: one static and one dynamic.
A photograph of the infant was included together with that of a same-sex peer and visual
preference was measured at all three ages. In addition, at 9 and 18 months, infants were
given the rouge mirror test. Demonstration of self-recognition in combination with
preference for same-sex others would constitute prima facie evidence that infants have
‘tacit’ knowledge of their own sex. The onset of self-knowledge and the age at which the
self-concept becomes gendered have begun to emerge as a central issues for gender
schema theory, particularly in light of the fact that ‘both sexes engage in gender-related
play and social interactions before most self-constructions have developed’ (Martin &
Ruble, 1997, p 46).

Gender schema and domain generality

A clear prediction that follows from gender schema theory is that once the child can
categorically discriminate the sex of others and has incorporated sex-of-self into the
gender schema, then the stage is set for a variety of sex-typed behaviour. However, sex-
typed behaviour in one domain is not reliably correlated with sex-typing in others
(Berenbaum & Snyder, 1995; Maccoby & Jacklin, 1987; Turner, Gervai, & Hinde,
1993). The possession of verbally tested gender labelling has been found to affect only
some sex-typed behaviours and the affected domains are inconsistent over studies (Fagot,
1985; Fagot & Leinbach, 1989; Fagot et al., 1986). Data suggest that the acquisition of
gender schema does not have uniform implications across sex-typed domains.

With respect to the trajectory of sex-typing across domains, gender schema theory
assumes only that children first ‘acquire information about behavior and activities and
later acquire information about more subtle psychological traits associated with sex
roles’ (Martin & Halverson, 1981, p. 112). It is possible, however, to propose some more
detailed hypotheses. The development of a gender schema begins with recognition of
two featural categories of human being. This may be facilitated by early recognition of
social and cultural cues such as hair length and clothing (Leinbach & Fagot, 1993).
Specifically one would expect that infants (like older children) first discriminate the sex
of adults and older children (who manifest cultural appearance cues) before they can
discriminate infants. Once people can be assigned to categories of male and female, then
inferences can be formed about relevant secondary attributes such as typical behaviours.
Following this, the infant may observe that the two sexes show different patterns of
interest in objects. The present authors propose, therefore, that sex-typed preferences
should appear in the following order: older children, babies, activities, toys.

484

Anne Campbell et al.

Summary of study rationale and method

The present study followed a cohort of 60 infants from the age of 3–18 months. A
simultaneous visual preference paradigm was used in which pairs of stimuli (sex-
congruent and sex-incongruent) from four domains (baby faces, child faces, toys and
activities ) were presented for viewing, and duration of gaze to each stimulus was
measured. The decision to use a simultaneous form of presentation stemmed from the
authors’ concern that, in sequential presentation, duration of gaze may not be a direct
measure of the infant’s preference for one stimuli at the expense of another, but rather a
measure of whether the screen is more interesting than an unlit room. In addition,
attention-releasing may be especially difficult if there are no competing stimuli
resulting in artificially long fixation times. The authors believe that a simultaneous
presentation paradigm is more ecologically valid because, in the real world, children are
bombarded with people and objects that compete for their attention and playing with
one toy or person precludes playing with another.

The present study had a number of aims. First, previous studies reporting early
gender preferences have been restricted to a single age point or, where age has been
included as a variable, the design has been cross-sectional. In some studies sample sizes
have been low. The present design follows a cohort of 60 infants across three age points;
3, 9 and 18 months. The selection of the 3-month age reflected the desire to ensure that
testing began sufficiently early to detect the onset of any gender preference. In addition,
by 3 months infants’ visual systems, posture and sleeping habits have matured
sufficiently to allow meaningful testing. The authors also wanted to examine the
possible existence of self-recognition from photographs reported by Bahrick et al. (1995)
at this age. The authors tested again at 9 months mindful of the findings of Lewis and
Brooks-Gunn (1979) and Kujawski and Bower (1993), who reported gender preference
at this age, and those of Leinbach and Fagot (1993), who found evidence of categorical
gender discrimination at approximately this age. The upper limit of 18 months was
selected because it was felt that this was the maximum age at which infants would be
willing to tolerate the testing conditions which required them to remain relatively static
and because at this age and shortly thereafter behavioural studies (reviewed above) have
indicated sex-congruent behaviour in some domains. The authors wanted to examine
whether these behavioural preferences would also be manifest in a visual preference
paradigm. At 18 months it was expected some of the sample to evidence mirror self-
recognition and the authors were interested in whether this ability would be correlated
with sex-congruent preferences in other domains. In addition to allowing the time
trajectory of sex-congruent preferences to be mapped, longitudinal data also offer the
opportunity to examine the stability of individual preferences over a 15-month period.
Secondly, although the work of Lewis and Brooks-Gunn (1979) is a notable
exception, most studies of early gender preference do not measure self-recognition. It has
often been assumed, rather than demonstrated, that gender-congruent preference results
from understanding of one’s own gender. Featural self-recognition was therefore
included in the study, particularly in light of Bahrick et al.’s (1995) findings of self-
recognition in 3-month-olds and mirror recognition was examined at 9 and 18 months.
Thirdly, prior work on gendered visual preference has restricted itself to a single
domain of interest, usually preference for faces. The present authors included two sets of

Infants’ preference for sex-congruency

485

faces – infants (where there is minimal cultural or social
information to assist
discrimination ) and older children (where such cues are present) – as well as toys and
activities. The latter two were selected because of prior reports of early sex differences.
Contrary to the predictions of gender schema theory, previous studies suggest that
gendered preferences appear in a somewhat uneven and piecemeal fashion. By including
four domains in the present design, the authors were able to examine the cross-domain
generality (or specificity ) of sex-typed preference at each age.

Participants

Method

A total of 60 infants (36 male and 24 female) was recruited through local health clinics and media
advertising. Data were lost in some domains at each of the testing periods because of infant fussiness. The
statistical analysis is based upon the following sample sizes and ages. For self-recognition, full data were
available for 43 participants (26 male, 17 female ) tested at a mean age of 13.9 weeks (SD = 1.5), 37.7
weeks (SD = 2.3) and 86.2 weeks (SD = 5.05). For baby face preference, full data were available for 49
participants (30 male, 19 female ) tested at 13.8 weeks (SD = 1.5), 37.7 weeks (SD = 2.2) and 86.5
weeks (SD = .8). For child face preference, full data were available for 48 participants (29 male, 19
female ) tested at 13.9 weeks (SD = 1.5), 37.7 weeks (SD = 2.2) and 86.6 weeks (SD = 5.0 ). For activity
preference, full data were available for 42 participants (26 male, 16 female ) tested at 13.9 weeks
(SD = 1.2), 37.7 weeks (SD = 1.9) and 85.8 weeks (SD = 5.2). For toy preference, full data were
available for 48 participants (29 male, 19 female ) tested at 13.8 weeks (SD = 1.9 ), 37.7 weeks
(SD = 2.2) and 86.4 weeks (SD = 4.8). All infants had been born full-term and were healthy at the time
of study. All but one infant were White with the remaining infant of mixed (Japanese–Caucasian )
parentage.

Procedure

On arrival, the infant’s photograph was taken by a professional photographer in a studio within the
building. Mothers and infants were then given as long as they needed to settle in the developmental
laboratory. After describing the study and showing the mothers and infants to their seat, mothers were
requested not to physically or verbally guide their child in any way toward one or other picture. Testing
took place in a booth 123 6 170cm created with plain hessian screens within the developmental
laboratory. The infant was seated on the mother’s knee at a distance of 60cm from the midpoint of two
computer screens (38cm screens) which were 20cm apart. The pairs of stimuli were presented
sequentially on the two monitors with the images subtending ~l168 6 138 of visual angle. A video
camera was located between two monitors behind a hardboard screen with only the lens protruding. This
was used to film the infant’s gaze during presentation of the stimuli.

Each infant viewed three series of still photographs and one series of videos. The static stimuli were:
(1) five pairs of infant faces (one male and one female ): interspersed in this series, infants were presented
with a photograph of themselves paired with that of a novel same-sex and same-age infant; self-
recognition was tested on only one occasion to avoid habituation effects; (2) five pairs of children’s faces
(one male and one female ); and (3) five pairs of sex-typed toys (one male-typical and one female-typical).
Each pair of pictures was presented for 30s (at ages 3 and 9 months ) and for 15s (at 18 months ). The
shorter exposure time at this age was based upon the infants’ greater mobility and shorter attention span.
Between each pair, the screen went blank and the infant’s attention was drawn to a central point between
the monitors by squeaking a toy through a hole in the hardboard screen. When the infant was judged to
be looking centrally, the next pair of pictures was shown. The three series of pictures ran consecutively.
The stimuli used for the activity preference were a series of five pairs of 30-s videos presented
simultaneously. Each video showed two children of the same sex as the infant performing play activities
traditionally associated with one sex or the other. The experimenter waited for the mother and infant to
look centrally before beginning the trial.

486

Anne Campbell et al.

Each infant saw the stimuli in the same pairings. Since complete counterbalancing was not possible,
eight versions of the task were developed which varied according to side of presentation and order of
stimulus pair within domain. Participants saw the pairs (in each domain ) in one of eight orders on each
testing occasion so that order effects could be detected by group comparison. In addition, there were
three orders of presentation of domains so that any systematic effect could be evaluated. Half the infants
saw their own face on the left and half on the right.

After the visual preference testing, infants at ages 9 and 18 months were given the rouge test
following the procedure used by Amsterdam (1972). The mother took the child’s hand and walked him
or her to a full-length mirror attached to a wall. She asked the child to look in the mirror. After one
minute, she walked the child away from the mirror and wiped his or her nose with a tissue that had red
make-up on it. She then led the child back to the mirror and asked the child to look again. After a
further minute, she placed some rouge on her own nose in full view of the child, pointed to her own
reflection and asked the child who it was and then pointed to the child’s image and asked who that was.
The scoring criteria were as follows: (1 ) No self-recognition: the infant makes no attempt to remove the
make-up from his or her nose after having seen his or her reflection in the mirror nor after the mother has
cued the child to its presence by applying some to herself. (2) Recognition from prompt: the infant
attempts to remove the make-up after the mother has applied some to herself. (3) Self-recognition: the
infant notices the make-up on his or her mirror image and attempts to wipe it off his or her nose prior to
the mother applying make-up to herself.

At the end of each session, the mother was thanked for her participation, reimbursed for travelling
expenses and told that a £5 donation would be made in her name to the Special Baby Care Unit of a local
hospital.

Stimulus materials

The photographs of 3-, 9- and 18-month-old infants were obtained from a local professional
photographer working in a studio. (These infants were not known to the participants of the study.) The
photographs of older children were of 5-year-olds taken in school during an annual visit by a professional
photographer. In all cases the face size, body orientation and background were held constant. The
photograph of the infant was taken at the laboratory prior to the testing in a studio, matching face size,
body angle and background to the pictures of their age-matched peers.

The selection of toys was based upon previously established categories of sex-differentiated preference
(Berenbaum & Snyder, 1995; Caldera et al., 1989; Carter & Levy, 1988; Coker, 1984; Edelbrock &
Sugawara, 1978; Eisenberg-Berg, Boothby, & Matson, 1979; Emmerich & Shepard, 1982; Fagot, 1984,
1985; Fagot & Leinbach, 1989; Huston, 1985; Martin & Little, 1990; Miller, 1987). Female-typical toys
were doll, oven, dustpan and brush, pram and toaster. Male-typical toys were ball, steering wheel, train,
cars and blocks. The selection of activities was based upon play styles previously established to be sex
differentiated (Fagot, 1984, 1985; Fagot & Leinbach, 1989; Green, Neuberg, & Finch, 1983;
Humphreys & Smith, 1984; Strayer & Strayer, 1976). Male-typical activities were chasing, climbing,
wrestling, cowboys and jumping and the female-typical activities were doll play, pat-a-cake, whispering,
drawing and telephones. All activities were performed by two boys (for viewing by male participants )
and two girls (for viewing by female participants ) aged between 6 and 7 years.

Coding

Coding of each series of stimuli began with the first frame in which the stimuli appeared and ceased
when the stimuli disappeared from the screen. Directional durations of looking times were calculated in
frames and transposed to milliseconds (40 frames = 1 ms). To establish inter-judge reliability, the
videotapes of six infants’ performance on all trials were coded by two scorers. Intra-class correlations
between the two scorers were .98 for on-target looking at either stimuli, .95 for left look duration and
.94 for right look duration. There was complete inter-judge agreement on performance in the rouge task
(k = 1.00). In the following analyses, because a shorter exposure time was used at age 18 months,
durations for same-sex looking and opposite-sex looking were each divided by the total exposure time
used at that age in order to achieve comparability between the three ages of testing.

Infants’ preference for sex-congruency

487

Results

Before beginning the substantive analysis, the author checked whether there were
significant differences between each of the eight groups who had received different sides
and orders of pairwise presentation. This was done by two-way analyses of variance
(ANOVA) of group membership (8) and sex-congruent/sex-incongruent (2) duration of
looking for each of the four domains and for the self-recognition trial at every age of
testing. There were no significant effects of side and order. Visual preference for self or
other was not affected by side of presentation. To check for a domain order effect, the
three groups (who had viewed the domains in different orders) were compared for each of
the four domains at each time period. There were no significant effects of order of
domain.

Sex-congruent preference and age
In each of the four domains (baby faces, child faces, activities and toys), a 2 6 3 repeated
measure ANOVA investigating the effect of sex-typing of photograph (same sex and
opposite sex) and age (3, 9 and 18 months). Greenhouse–Geisser corrections for
sphericity were made where appropriate. Sex of
infant was not included as an
independent variable in the initial analysis on two grounds. At a theoretical level,
gender schema makes no prediction of sex differences in the acquisition of sex-congruent
preferences and hence the authors were not in a position to offer a priori hypotheses
about main or interactive effects of infant sex. At a statistical level, the introduction of a
third independent variable raises the probability of spurious two- and three-way
interactions, especially where the analysis is conducted separately for each of the four
domains. Where a significant main effect of sex-congruent preference was found, the
analysis for boys and girls was repeated separately. Note that the correction for exposure
time of the stimuli means that same-sex and opposite-sex looking times are expressed as
proportion of total time available for looking (see Table 1). In all the analyses, age of
testing exerted a significant impact upon total proportion of exposure time spent
looking at both targets. In each case, the pattern is curvilinear with a decrease in
proportion of looking time on target between 3 and 9 months and an increase between 9
and 18 months. Because the time available was halved at 18 months, this pattern of
rising values at the oldest age most likely reflects the shorter exposure time used. For
this reason, for each analysis, the authors begin by noting the main effects of age where
they are present but do not present results of post-hoc tests, as these may be misleading.

Self–other preference. A 3 6 2 ANOVA was conducted to examine self–other preference as
a function of age. The effect of age was significant (F(2,84) = 6.34, p < .01). There was
no significant difference in looking duration at photographs of self vs. same-sex peer.
There was no significant interaction between photo preference and age. Thus there is no
evidence that infants recognized themselves from photographs over the ages tested.

On the rouge test, none of the infants at 9 months demonstrated self-recognition or
prompted self-recognition. At 18 months, 52 children participated in the test. Of these,
35 (67%) showed spontaneous self-recognition (16 females and 19 males). Three of the
children (6%) showed prompted self-recognition (one female and two males). Fourteen

488

Anne Campbell et al.

Table 1. Mean proportions (and standard deviations) of exposure time spent looking at
gender-congruent and gender-incongruent stimuli by domain, age and sex of infant

3 months

9 months

18 months

Total

M

F

Total

M

F

Total

M

F

.34 (.28) .36 (.27) .30 (.30) .33 (.16) .35 (.17) .30 (.14) .38 (.17) .35 (.15) .43 (.18)
Self preference
.37 (.28) .34 (.27) .42 (.30) .25 (.11) .25 (.11) .25 (.12) .32 (.15) .34 (.16) .29 (.14)
Other preference
.47 (.17) .51 (.15) .41 (.19) .27 (.07) .28 (.07) .25 (.05) .33 (.09) .33 (.11) .32 (.07)
Same-sex baby
.43 (.18) .39 (.17) .47 (.18) .27 (.07) .28 (.07) .27 (.08) .34 (.09) .30 (.08) .40 (.08)
Opposite sex baby
.41 (.18) .41 (.22) .42 (.13) .29 (.08) .30 (.08) .28 (.10) .33 (.08) .31 (.08) .36 (.07)
Same-sex child
.41 (.19) .44 (.22) .36 (.15) .29 (.09) .30 (.10) .26 (.08) .33 (.09) .32 (.09) .36 (.10)
Opposite-sex child
.57 (.23) .63 (.17) .35 (.23) .33 (.19) .45 (.15) .16 (.05) .48 (.24) .63 (.15) .26 (.19)
Sex-congruent activity
Sex-incongruent activity .40 (.24) .27 (.18) .61 (.18) .33 (.15) .24 (.10) .48 (.09) .30 (.21) .16 (.06) .53 (.17)
.36 (.12) .36 (.12) .37 (.13) .30 (.10) .32 (.10) .27 (.09) .45 (.11) .46 (.11) .43 (.11)
Sex congruent toy
Sex incongruent toy
.37 (.12) .41 (.11) .32 (.10) .27 (.09) .27 (.07) .28 (.09) .38 (.09) .36 (.09) .42 (.09)

children (27%) showed no evidence of self-recognition. The sex difference in self-
recognition performance was not significant.

Baby faces. Again there was a main effect of age on duration of looking (F(2,96) = 38.08,
p < .001). The main effect of sex of baby face photographs was not significant. The age
by baby face interaction approached significance (F(2,96) = 2.96, p < .06). At 3
months, preference for same-sex photos was marginally significant (F(1,56) = 2.97,
p < .09), although not at 9 and 18 months. However, inspection of the means for males
and females revealed that both sexes showed a preference for male rather than female
faces. This was highly significant for males (F(1,33) = 9.98, p < .003), but was not
significant for females.
Child faces. The only significant effect was age of participant on total
(F(2,92) = 14.75, p < .001).
Activities. The effect of age on total looking time was significant (F(2,82) = 34.96,
p < .001). There was a marginally significant preference for sex-congruent activities
(F(1,41) = 3.92, p < .06). The interaction of sex-congruent activity and age was also
significant (F(2,82) = 5.67, p < .01). Sex congruent preference was evident but not
significant at 3 and 9 months, but was significant at 18 months (F(1,63) = 4.97,
p < .05). The sample was split by sex to examine whether the sex-congruent preference
was equally strong for boys and girls.

looking

Boys

showed a strong main effect of

sex-congruent activity preference
(F(1,25) = 169.57, p < .001) as well as a main effect of age (F(2,50) = 16.60,
p < .001). The age 6 activity preference interaction was also significant
(F(2,50) = 7.92, p < .001). For boys the sex-congruent preference became increasingly
significant at each age tested (3 months: F(1,30) = 54.63, p < .001; 9 months:
F(1,35) = 58.09, p < .001; 18 months: F(1,28) = 163.36, p < .001).

Analysis of the girls’ data indicated a significant effect of activity preference
(F(1,15) = 37.08, p < .001), but examination of
this
preference was in the direction of a preference for masculine activities. There was also

indicated that

the means

Infants’ preference for sex-congruency

489

a significant effect of age (F(2,30) = 37.08, p < .001). The interaction term was not
significant.

To examine whether the preference for masculine activities was equally strong in boys
and girls, a two-way ANOVA (three ages of testing 6 sex of infant) was performed with
masculine activity preference as the dependent variable. This was computed by
subtracting looking duration at feminine activities from looking duration at masculine
activities. The age effect was not significant. The main effect of sex was marginally
significant (F(1,40) = 3.87, p < .06) with males looking longer at masculine activities
than females. The age 6 sex interaction was also significant (F(2,80) = 4.70), p < .05).
At 3 months (F(1,53) = 3.98, p < .06) and at 18 months (F(1,47) = 10.81, p < .01)
males’ preference for masculine activities was significantly stronger than females.
Although in the same direction, the greater male preference for masculine acts was not
significant at 9 months.

Toys. Age of child exerted an impact on total looking duration (F(2,94) = 43.04,
p < .001). Preference for sex-congruent toys was significant (F(1,47) = 4.45, p < .05).
The age 6 toy preference interaction was also significant (F(2,94) = 4.13, p < .05).
Sex-congruent toy preference was not significant at 3 months, but was significant at
9 months (F(1,56) = 3.87, p < .06) and at 18 months (F(1,55) = 12.55, p < .001).

(F(1,28) = 3.67, p < .06). The sex-congruent

The analysis was performed again on boys only. Again, looking times varied with age
(F(2,56) = 22.32, p < .001). The main effect of
toy preference was marginally
toy preference 6 age
significant
interaction was also significant (F(2,56) = 11.83, p < .001). At 3 months boys showed
no significant preference, but at ages 9 (F(1,33) = 8.54, p < .001) and 18
(F(1,31) = 13.61, p < .001) months they displayed a significant preference for sex-
congruent toys.

For girls, looking times varied with age (F(2,36) = 23.62, p < .001) but there was no
main effect of toy stimulus and no significant interaction between toy preference and
age.

Self-recognition and sex-typed preference

In order to examine whether self-recognition was associated with greater sex-congruent
preference, participants at each age were dichotomized according to whether they
displayed preference for self or for other same-sex peer on the visual preference task. A
two-way (self/other preference and sex-congruent/sex-incongruent duration of gaze)
ANOVA was then performed for each of the domains at each age. The results were
uniformly negative. There is no significant difference between infants who show self
rather than other preference with respect to differential gaze in any of the domains at any
age.

The authors then examined whether mirror self-recognition was associated with sex-
typed preferences at 18 months. Because of the small number of participants showing
prompted self-recognition, these participants were re-allocated to the category of no self-
recognition. A series of five 2 6 2 ANOVAs was then performed with self-recognition
and sex-congruent preference in the domains of toys, activities, baby faces, child faces
and self preference as the two independent variables. None of these tests was significant.

490

Anne Campbell et al.

When the prompted self-recognition children were reclassified as self-recognizers, the
results remained insignificant.

Regression analysis

To this point we have addressed the question of whether infants show a significant
preference for sex-congruent compared with sex-incongruent stimuli and whether this
changes as a function of domain and age. In this portion of the results the sex-preference
variable (computed by subtracting gender-incongruent proportion of looking from
gender-congruent proportion of looking for each domain and every age) is used as an
interval level measurement of the child’s relative preference for sex-congruent stimuli.
This measure was first used to examine preference stability between testing periods.
The results of these zero-order correlations are presented in Table 2. For baby face, child
face and toy preference, the correlations between ages 3 and 9 months were not
significant, while those between 9 and 18 months were all significant, suggesting
increasing (if modest) stability at later ages. Activity preference showed the same
increase in the magnitude of the correlations with age, but here the values were much
larger, suggesting considerable stability in infants’ preference for high vs. low velocity
movement. Sex of infant was treated as a dummy variable and maleness was associated
with a significant tendency to prefer same-sex baby faces at 3 and 18 months and a very
marked tendency to prefer sex-congruent activities at all ages tested.

Table 2. Zero-order correlations of sex-congruent preferences between ages and with sex
of infant by domain

Baby

Child faces Toys faces Activities

Ages 3 & 18 months
.29*
Ages 3 & 9 months
.06
Ages 9 & 18 months
.29*
Infant sexa & 3 month preference 7.36**
Infant sexa & 9 month preference 7.14
Infant sexa & 18 month preference 7.53***

.04
.29*
.29*
.27*
.12
.01

7.13
.64***
.03
.68***
.29*
.72***
.32* 7.74***
7.29* 7.87***
7.15
7.85***

* p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001.
a male = 0, female = 1.

The question then posed was: What is the best predictor of a child’s sex-congruent
preference at age 18 months? To answer this, hierarchical multiple regression analyses
were used in which the entry of variables to the model was specified according to the
magnitude of their zero-order correlations with sex preference at 18 months reported in
Table 2. For baby face preference, sex as the first-entered variable had an adjusted R2 of
.297 (b = 7.558, t = 74.61, p < .001). The addition of sex-congruent preference at
age 9 months made a non-significant contribution and increased the R2 to .314. For
child face preference, the first-entered variable was child face preference at 9 months but
which explained only .06% of the variance and which was non-significant. For activity
t = 79.74,
preference, sex alone produced an adjusted R2 of

.696 (b = 7.839,

Infants’ preference for sex-congruency

491

p < .001), with activity preference at 9 months making no significant contribution to
explained variance.
(Recall that the prior ANOVA indicated both sexes preferred
masculine activities; the significance of sex found in this regression is a function of the
relatively greater preference by boys.)

For toy preference at 18 months, the infants’ preference at 9 months was the first-
entered variable. The adjusted R2 was .118 (b = .370, t = 2.70, p < .01) and further
variables made no significant contribution to the model. In summary, for baby face
preference and activity preference, the best predictor was simply the sex of the child.
This showed a stronger relationship to sex-congruent preference than either of the
preceding preference variables from that domain. In the case of activity preference, this
effect was particularly marked with sex of infant accounting for 70% of the variance in
sex congruent preference at 18 months. In the case of toy preference, the best predictor
was toy preference measured at 9 months.

Although the above analyses can assist in understanding the direction and strength of
the relationship between variables over time, they do not directly address a simple,
categorical developmental question: Do infants show an orderly progression toward sex-
congruent preference over age? Given that infants were tested at three ages, measures of
sex preference allow one to ask whether the majority of infants show an orderly pattern
of sex-congruent preference with increasing age. Where 1 is designated as sex-congruent
preference and 0 is designated as sex-incongruent preference, one can establish the
number of children that show an orderly sequence across the three testing ages (000,
001, 011, 111) and those that show a disorderly sequence. The results of this analysis are
given in Table 3. A one-way chi-square statistic was computed comparing the frequency
of infants characterized by orderly and disorderly sequences in each domain. For self-
recognition, baby face and child face preference, there was no significant tendency for
infants to follow an orderly sequence. For activity and toy preference, however, the
frequency of infants showing an ordered preference was significantly above chance. In
both cases, the majority of ‘ordered’ infants showed a pattern of either sex-congruent
preference at all ages tested or acquisition of a sex-congruent preference by the age of
9 months.

Table 3. Patterns of ordered and disordered sex-congruent development by domain

Sequence

Domain

000

001

011

111

Ordered

cases

Disordered

cases

w

2

Self
Baby faces
Child faces
Activities
Toys

2
9
5
4
12

4
2
3
6
2

13
6
5
14
1

6
11
6
11
22

25
28
19
35
37

19
21
29
13
5

n.s.
n.s.
n.s.

11.08 (p < .01)
24.38 (p < .01)

492

Anne Campbell et al.

Correlations between domains

The same preference measure was used to examine the degree of cross-domain gender
congruent preference. This entailed computing 10 correlations for each of the three ages
of testing. There were a total of three significant correlations (a number not exceeding
chance), of which one was negative. The significant correlations were: baby face
preference and activity preference at 3 months (r = .47, p < .001); baby face and child
face preference at 9 months (r = 7.29, p < .05); and self and child face preference at
9 months (r = .37, p < .01).

Discussion

Infants even by the age of 18 months do not show evidence of self-recognition when
measured by visual preference. If infants do recognize themselves, it is not evident in any
significant tendency to look longer at their own image. Furthermore, differential
looking to self and other is highly unstable over the age range tested (whether assessed
by cross-age correlations or by the frequency of disorderly sequences) and, regardless of
age tested, self-preference is unrelated to sex-congruent preferences in any of the other
domains. The visual preference measure (at 18 months) is unrelated to the child’s
performance on the rouge task and success on this latter
task is unrelated to
contemporaneous measures of sex-congruent preference. This suggests that sex-typed toy
preference and the greater male preference for masculine activities is unlikely to be a
function of gender schematic processing and is more likely to arise from low-level
features of the stimuli that are differentially interesting or pleasurable to male and
female infants (Benenson et al., 1997; Freedman, 1974).

Despite tantalizing hints in past studies of same-sex peer preference among 16–18-
month-old infants, the present study was unable to replicate this effect. There was a
marginally significant preference in this direction at age 3 months, but this was not
carried forward to later ages and it is precisely at these later ages that one would have
expected to see the preference emerge. Because the authors were interested in peer
preference, the infants viewed different photographs at each age (following Lewis &
Brooks-Gunn’s (1979) design) and it is therefore possible that the male and female
photographs were more clearly discriminable by sex at age 3 months than at later ages.
However, this seems unlikely since gender-discriminating cues were more evident in
pictures of 18-month-olds than of 3-month-olds, yet at this age no same-sex preference
was evident. Indeed when infants viewed photographs of 5-year-old children (in which
gender cues are particularly clear ), they also displayed no significant preference. It is
concluded that even when gender discriminating cues are available, infants at 9 and 18
months show no discernible preference for their own sex. It seems highly unlikely that
this is a result of failure to discriminate between the sexes since previous studies have
demonstrated that infants display much subtler discriminations such as between
unknown adults chosen for featural similarity (Barrera & Maurer, 1981) and between
attractive and unattractive faces (Langlois, Roggman, & Rieser-Danner, 1990; Samuels
& Ewy, 1985). If infants respond to attractiveness in baby faces as well as adult faces,
then the same-sex preference at 3 months may have been the result of the male
photographs being more attractive than those of the females. The secondary analysis
indeed suggested that both sexes showed a preference for the male faces (although not

Infants’ preference for sex-congruency

493

significantly so for girls), which tends to support such a suggestion. Further work
examining whether infant preference for attractive faces extends to other infants as well
as adults is clearly needed.

In the present study, infants saw same-sex older children engaged in male-typical and
female-typical activities. The activities differed chiefly in the amount of gross motor
activity involved. The results indicate that both sexes show a preference for masculine
activities. High propulsion gross motor activity seems to be inherently more interesting
than more restrained motion to infants of both sexes. This may be a visual analogue of
the reflexive tendency to orient to fast movement as indicative of potential danger – in
the same way that young infants seek to avoid ‘looming’ objects (Nanez & Yonas, 1994).
The stronger male preference for high activity movement emerges from the between-sex
analysis of variance results, but is especially clear in the multiple regression analysis
where sex alone accounted for 70% of the variance in activity preference at the age of
18 months. Male preference becomes increasingly significant at each age of testing,
while in females this preference does not show age variation.

Kujawksi and Bower (1993), using movement cues alone, with type of activity
(running) held constant,
found same-sex preference at ages 10–14 months. They
interpreted this finding as indicating high level coding in which the infant must
integrate visual information from the infant actor and proprioceptive information about
his or her own movements in order to discriminate the sex of actor and show a same-sex
preference. The authors do not indicate whether all of their participants were able to run
at the time of testing and so this conclusion remains speculative. The present data
suggest that before the participants were able to walk (at ages 3 and 9 months) there was
a clear preference for locomotor motion, and that this preference was greater among
males than among females. However, the sex difference in magnitude of preference
became most marked after the participants were mobile at 18 months. This seems to
support Kujawksi and Bower’s suggestion that the matching of proprioceptive and
visual
information informs discrimination and preference, but that preference is
apparent before proprioceptive cues are available.

A further noteworthy point is the stability of the activity preference over time.
Unlike the other domains, the stability was of the order of .70 between testing ages,
indicating that whatever is driving the preference remains relatively constant from age
3–18 months. This was also reflected by the fact that the majority of infants show a clear
orderly sequence in their acquisition of this preference. It is here suggested that the
constancy may derive from differences in orienting and attentional processes to fast-
moving and therefore potentially dangerous stimuli. In short, it may be a measure of
wariness or sensitivity to environmental perturbation. It would be interesting to
examine this early-appearing and consistent response in the context of temperamental
differences and mother–infant attachment, as well as in the context of sex differences in
stimulation-seeking or fear.

Prior behavioural studies have found that toys are a domain in which sex-typed
preference appears very early. They have been reported at 14 months and younger
(Caldera et al., 1989; Roopnarine, 1986). This is the first time that this early appearing
preference has been examined using visual preference. The present data confirm that
there is a clear sex-congruent preference for toys and that this is evident by 9 months of
age. Decomposing the sample by sex, it appeared that sex-congruent toy choice was

494

Anne Campbell et al.

evident in the male, but not the female, sample and that the effect is again significant
from the age of 9 months. By 18 months girls had also begun to show a non-significant
tendency to prefer same-sex toys. To examine whether the failure to achieve significance
might be a function of the smaller female sample size, the effect sizes for both sexes were
captured at 18 months. The value for boys was d = 1.02, while for girls it was 0.13;
sample size would be unlikely to explain such a very marked discrepancy.

The early onset of toy preference is problematic for gender schema theory on two
counts. The infant’s first cognitive task is to discriminate between the sexes and only
after that is he or she able to turn his or her attention to the objects in the environment
that are preferred by one sex or the other. Hence, toy preference would be expected to be
the last domain to show sex differentiation. It is also problematic because past studies
suggest that toy preferences are not conditional on knowing for which sex a given toy is
appropriate. In the present study also, infants show toy preference without showing
evidence of self-recognition or preferences for same-sex babies or children. If infant
preferences are not driven by gender schema, then what are they based upon? One
answer may lie in the toy’ ‘affordances’ – that is, the type of play activity that the toy
affords to the child. Dolls afford the expression of nurturance, while trucks afford
movement. Miller (1987) asked adult raters to compare male- and female-typed toys
along a number of dimensions. She found that female-typical toys were judged more
aesthetically attractive and afforded more opportunity for removal and replacement of
parts, creativity and nurturance, while male-typed toys afforded greater opportunity for
sociability, competition, aggression, symbolic play, handling, and construction of new
forms. Nine-month-old infants may not have had the opportunity (or possess the
manual dexterity) to realize such affordances behaviourally. If so, then these affordances
must exist
than as memories of past
experiences. In more concrete terms, empirical work is needed to establish what are the
low level properties (e.g. wheels, facial features, texture, size) which are differentially
attractive to male and female infants.

representational

in potential

form rather

The longitudinal and cross-domain design of the study makes it more comprehensive
in scope than previous cross-sectional studies. The data suggest that there is little
evidence for preferences as early as 3 months. By 9 months, however, preferences are
beginning to emerge in the domains of activities and toys. Between this age and
18 months there is correlational evidence of significant temporal stability of these
preferences which is confirmed by the analysis of orderly and disorderly sequences of
development. There is, however, no evidence of age-specific cross-domain consistency in
sex-typed preference and this is in line with results from older preschool children. In
short, and to echo Mischel (1968), though some preferences may be trait-like in their
temporal stability, they are situational in their specificity to a particular domain. As
Maccoby and Jacklin (1987) noted, group level differences between the preferences of
boys and girls may not necessarily reflect individual-level consistency in sex-congruent
choice. Those boys who show a significantly greater preference for high velocity
movement may not be the same boys who show a preference for sex-congruent toys.

In any study of visual preference, one must be cautious in extrapolating to later
behavioural differences between the sexes. Behavioural sex differences may arise from
direct experience and engagement rather than from the more limited cues available from
visual inspection alone. With respect to activity levels, for example, sex differences may

Infants’ preference for sex-congruency

495

be a function of proprioceptive feedback from gross motor behaviour being more
pleasurable to boys than to girls, while early visual preferences may reflect the visually
compelling element of fast motion. Toy preferences may arise from boys and girls
responding more or less favorably to the kinds of activities that are afforded by trucks vs.
dolls rather than to the visual properties of the two types of stimuli. Peer preference may
depend upon experiencing the different interpersonal styles of boys and girls (and
developing a liking for one more than the other) rather than on the different appearance
of the two sexes (Maccoby & Jacklin, 1987). Casual observation suggests that the
behavioural and visual preference may be linked: boys not only like to play football, they
also (admittedly to a lesser extent) like to watch football. Girls like to play with dolls
and also to attend to doll adverts on television. Further examination of the ordering of
the visual and behavioural preferences would be desirable. Gender schema theory would
suggest that viewing preferences precede behavioural preferences because salient sex-
typed information from the social environment is used to inform behavioural preference.
However, if behavioural preferences were found to precede viewing preference, it would
suggest
feedback from direct
engagement in sex-typed activities.

sex differences are mediated by differential

that

The present study suggests that gender schema requires further specification in a
number of areas. First, the central role of knowledge of one’s own sex must be
acknowledged and if this is proposed to appear at a preverbal level, innovative ways of
accessing it must be developed. Secondly, the present study as well as others have
indicated that sex-congruent choices can appear before the child has knowledge of his or
her own sex. Further attention needs to be accorded to the low-level features of stimuli
that make them differentially interesting to each sex and some theoretical model
proposed of how such preferences are mediated. Finally, gender schema theory needs to
formulate a clearer set of predictions about sex-congruent choice over domains and over
age. As originally presented (Martin & Halverson, 1981), the expectation is that once
the schema is in place, sex-congruent choices should emerge simultaneously in many
domains. Clearly they do not, and it remains unclear why toys and activities elicit very
early differential attention by male and female infants when more obviously sex-typed
stimuli, such as faces, do not.

The authors thank the Economic and Social Research Council who funded this work through grant
R000236735. They are grateful to Steven Muncer and Robert Kentridge for advice on data analysis.

Acknowledgements

References

Amsterdam, B. (1972). Mirror self-image reactions before age two. Developmental Psychobiology, 5, 297–

305.

Bahrick, L. E., Moss, L., & Fadil, C. (1996 ). Development of self-recognition in infancy. Ecological

Psychology, 8, 189–208.

Barrera, M. E., & Maurer, D. (1981). Discrimination of strangers by the three-month-old. Child

Development, 52, 558–563.

Bem, S. (1981). Gender schema theory: A cognitive account of sex typing. Psychological Review, 88, 354–

364.

Benenson, J. F., Liroff, E. R., Pascal, S. J., & Cioppa, G. D. (1997). Propulsion: A behavioural expression

of masculinity. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 15, 37–50.

496

Anne Campbell et al.

Berenbaum, S. A., & Snyder, E. (1995). Early hormonal influences on childhood sex-typed activity and
playmate preferences: Implications for the development of sexual orientation. Developmental Psychology,
31, 31–42.

Bertenthal, B. I., & Fischer, K. W.
Developmental Psychology, 14, 44–50.

(1978). The development of self-recognition in the infant.

Bigelow, A. E. (1981). The correspondence between self- and image movements as a cue to self-

recognition in young children. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 139, 11–26.

Blakemore, J., LaRue, A., & Olejnik, A. (1979). Sex-appropriate toy preference and the ability to

conceptualise toys as sex role related. Developmental Psychology, 15, 339–340.

Bremner, J. G. (1994). Infancy (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell.
Brooks, J., & Lewis, M. (1974). Attachment behavior in thirteen-month-old, opposite sex twins. Child

Development, 45, 243–247.

Bullock, M., & Lutkenhaus, P. (1990). Who am I? Self understanding in toddlers. Merrill-Palmer

Quarterly, 36, 217–238.

Caldera, Y., Huston, A., & O’Brien, M. (1989 ). Social interactions and play patterns of parents and

toddlers with feminine, masculine and neutral toys. Child Development, 60, 70–76.

Carter, D. B., & Levy, G. D. (1988). Cognitive aspects of children’s early sex role development: The
influence of gender schemas on preschool memories and preferences for sex-typed toys and activities.
Child Development, 59, 782–793.

Coker, D. R. (1984). The relationships among gender concepts and cognitive maturity in preschool

children. Sex Roles, 10, 19–31.

Eaton, W. O., & Enns, L. R. (1986). Sex differences in human motor activity level. Psychological Bulletin,

Edelbrock, C., & Sugawara, A. I. (1978). Acquisition of sex-typed preferences in preschool-aged children.

100, 19–28.

Developmental Psychology, 14, 614–623.

Eisenberg-Berg, N., Boothby, R., & Matson, T. (1979). Correlates of preschool girls’ feminine and

masculine toy preferences. Developmental Psychology, 15, 354–355.

Emmerich, W., & Shepard, K. (1982). Development of sex-differentiated preferences during late

childhood and adolescence. Developmental Psychology, 14, 614–623.

Etaugh, C., Grinnell, K., & Etaugh, A. (1989). Development of gender labeling: Effects of age of

pictured children. Sex Roles, 21, 769–773.

Fagot, B. (1984). Teacher and peer reactions to boys’ and girls’ play styles. Sex Roles, 11, 691–702.
Fagot, B. (1985). Changes in thinking about early sex role development. Developmental Review, 5, 83–98.
Fagot, B., & Leinbach, M. (1989). The young child’s gender schema: Environmental input, internal

organisation. Child Development, 60, 663–672.

Fagot, B., Leinbach, M., & Hagan, R. (1986). Gender labeling and the adoption of sex-typed behaviours.

Developmental Psychology, 22, 440–443.

Freedman, D. (1974). Human infancy: An evolutionary perspective. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gelman, S. A., Collman, P., & Maccoby, E. E. (1986). Inferring properties from categories versus

inferring categories from properties. Child Development, 57, 396–404.

Goldberg, S., & Lewis, M. (1969). Play behaviour in the year-old infant: Early sex differences. Child

Development, 40, 21–31.

Green, R., Neuberg, D. S., & Finch, S. J. (1983 ). Sex-typed motor behaviours of ‘feminine’ boys,

conventionally masculine boys and conventionally feminine girls. Sex Roles, 9, 573–579.

Haugh, S. S., Hoffman, C. D., & Cowan, G. (1980). The eye of the very young beholder: Sex typing of

infants by young children. Child Development, 51, 598–600.

Hoyenga, K. B., & Hoyenga, K. T. (1993). Gender-related differences. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Humphreys, A. P., & Smith, P. K. (1984). Rough-and-tumble in preschool and playground. In P. K.

Smith (Ed.), Play in animals and humans (pp. 241–270). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Huston, A. (1983). Sex typing. In P. Mussen & M. Hetherington (Eds. ), Handbook of child psychology: Vol.

4. Socialisation, personality and social behavior (pp. 388–467). New York: Wiley.

Huston, A. (1985 ). The development of sex typing: Themes from recent research. Development Review, 5,

1–7.

Johnson, D. B. (1983). Self-recognition in infants. Infant Behavior and Development, 6, 211–222.

Infants’ preference for sex-congruency

497

Kagan, J., & Lewis, M. (1965). Studies of attention in the human infant. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 11,

95–127.

Kohlberg, L. (1966). A cognitive-developmental analysis of children’s sex role concepts attitudes. In E.
Maccoby (Ed.), The development of sex differences (pp. 82–173). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Kohnstamm, G.A., Bates, J. E., & Rothbart, M. K. (Eds.) (1989). Temperament in childhood. Chichester:

Wiley.

Kujawski, J. H., & Bower, T. G. R. (1993). Same-sex preferential looking during infancy as a function of

abstract representation. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 11, 201–209.

Langlois, J. H., Roggman, L. A., & Rieser-Danner, L. A. (1990 ). Infants differential social responses to

attractive and unattractive faces. Developmental Psychology, 26, 153–159.

Leinbach, M. D., & Fagot, B. I. (1993 ). Categorical habituation to male and female faces: Gender

schematic processing in infancy. Infant Behavior and Development, 16, 317–332.

Lewis, M., & Brooks, J. (1975). Infants’ social perception: A constructivist view. In L. Cohen & P.
Salapatek (Eds. ), Infant perception: From sensation to cognition: Vol. 2. Perception of space, speech and sound
(pp. 101–148). New York: Academic Press.

Lewis, M., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1979). Social cognition and the acquisition of self. New York: Plenum.
Loveland, K. A.

(1987 ). Behavior of young children with Down’s syndrome before the mirror:

Exploration. Child Development, 58, 768–778.

Maccoby, E. E., & Jacklin, C. N. (1987). Gender segregation in childhood. In H. Reese (Ed.), Advances in

child development Vol. 20, (pp. 239–287). New York: Academic Press.

Martin, C. L.

(1989). Children’s use of gender-related information in making social

judgments.

Developmental Psychology, 25, 80–88.

Martin, C. L., & Halverson, C. F. (1981). A schematic processing model of sex-typing and stereotyping

in children. Child Development, 52, 1119–1134.

Martin, C. L., & Little, J. K. (1990). The relation of gender understanding to children’s sex-typed

preferences and gender stereotypes. Child Development, 61, 1891–1904.

Martin, C. L., & Ruble, D. N. (1997). A developmental perspective on self-construals and sex differences:

Comment on Cross and Madison (1997). Psychological Bulletin, 122, 45–50.

Messer, S. B., & Lewis, M. (1972). Social class and sex differences in the attachment and play behavior of

the one-year-old infant. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 18, 295–306.

Miller, C. L. (1987). Qualitative differences among gender-stereotyped toys: Implications for cognitive

and social development. Sex Roles, 16(9/10), 473–487.

Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and assessment. New York: Wiley.
Nanez, J. E., & Yonas, A. (1994). Effects of luminance and texture motion on infant defensive reactions

to optical collision. Infant Behavior and Development, 17, 165–174.

Perry, D., White, A., & Perry, L. (1984). Does early sex-typing result from children’s attempts to match

their behavior to sex role stereotypes? Child Development, 55, 2114–2121.

Poulin-Dubois, D., Serbin, L., Kenyon, B., & Derbyshire, A. (1994). Infants intermodal knowledge

about gender. Developmental Psychology, 30, 436–442.

Robinson, J. A., Connell, S., McKenzie, B. E., & Day, R. H. (1990 ). Do infants use their own images to

locate objects reflected in a mirror? Child Development, 61, 1558–1568.

Roopnarine, J.L.

(1986). Mothers’ and fathers’ behaviors toward the toy play of

infant sons and

daughters. Sex Roles, 14, 59–68.

Ruble, D. N., & Martin, C. L. (1998). Gender development. In W. Damon & N. Eisenberg (Eds. ),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional and personality development (pp. 933–1016). New
York: John Wiley.

Ruble, D. N., & Stangor, C. (1986). Stalking the elusive schema: Insights from developmental and

social-psychological analyses of gender schema. Social Cognition, 4, 227–261.

Samuels, C. A., & Ewy, R. (1985). Aesthetic perception of faces during infancy. British Journal of

Developmental Psychology, 3, 221–228.

Spelke, E. E. (1985). Preferential looking methods as tools for the study of cognition in infancy. In G.
Gottlieb & N. A. Krasnegor (Eds. ), Measurement of audition and vision in the first year of postnatal life: A
methodological handbook (pp. 323–364). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Stangor, C., & Ruble, D. N. (1987). Development of gender role knowledge and gender constancy. In L.
S. Liben & M. L. Signorella (Eds. ), Children’s gender schemata (pp. 5–22). San Francisco: Jossey Bass.

498

Anne Campbell et al.

Strayer, F. F., & Strayer, J. (1976). An ethological analysis of social agonism and dominance relations

among preschool children. Child Development, 47, 980–989.

Turner, P. J., Gervai, J., & Hinde, R. A. (1993). Gender-typing in young children: Preferences,

behaviour and cultural differences. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 11, 323–341.

Wagner, S., Winner, E., Cicchetti, D., & Gardner, H. (1981). ‘Metaphorical’ mapping in human infants.

Child Development, 52, 728–731.

Weinraub, M., Clements, L. P., Sockloff, A., Ethridge, T. E., Gracely, E., & Myers, B. (1984). The
development of sex role stereotypes in the third year: Relationships to gender labeling, gender
identity, sex-typed toy preference and family characteristics. Child Development, 55, 1493–1503.

Younger, B. A. (1985). The segregation of items into categories by 10-month-old infants. Child

Development, 56, 1574–1583.

Younger, B. A., & Cohen, L. B. (1983). Infant perception of correlations among attributes. Child

Development, 54, 858–867.

Received 24 June 1999; revised version received 4 October 1999


The ENd of Document.