 
 
Social Cognition, Joint Attention, and Communicative Competence from 9 to 15 Months
of Age
Author(s): Malinda Carpenter, Katherine Nagell, Michael Tomasello, George Butterworth
and  Chris Moore
Source: Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, Vol. 63, No. 4,
Social Cognition, Joint Attention, and Communicative Competence from 9 to 15 Months
of Age (1998), pp. i+iii+v-vi+1-174
Published by: Wiley on behalf of the Society for Research in Child Development
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1166214
Accessed: 08-06-2020 14:20 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Society for Research in Child Development, Wiley are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MONOGRAPHS OF THE

 SOCIETY FOR RESEARCH IN

 CHILD DEVELOPMENT

 Serial No. 255, Vol. 63, No. 4, 1998

 SOCIAL COGNITION, JOINT ATTENTION,

 AND COMMUNICATIVE COMPETENCE
 FROM 9 TO 15 MONTHS OF AGE

 Malinda Carpenter
 Katherine Nagell

 Michael Tomasello

 WITH COMMENTARY BY

 George Butterworth

 Chris Moore

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MONOGRAPHS OF THE SOCIETY FOR RESEARCH IN CHILD DEVELOPMENT

 Serial No. 255, Vol. 63, No. 4, 1998

 CONTENTS

 ABSTRACT v

 I. INTRODUCTION 1

 II. METHOD 34

 STRUCTURED TESTS OF SOCIAL COGNITION 52

 III. RESULTS OF STUDY 1:

 JOINT ENGAGEMENT AND COMMUNICATION 82

 IV. RESULTS OF STUDY 2:

 V. GENERAL DISCUSSION 116

 APPENDIX 134

 REFERENCES 135

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 143

 COMMENTARY

 ORIGINS OF JOINT VISUAL ATTENTION IN INFANCY

 George Butterworth 144

 SOCIAL COGNITION IN INFANCY

 Chris Moore 167

 CONTRIBUTORS 175

 STATEMENT OF

 EDITORIAL POLICY 176

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ABSTRACT

 CARPENTER, MALINDA, NAGELL, KATHERINE, and TOMASELLO, MICHAEL. Social
 Cognition, Joint Attention, and Communicative Competence from 9 to
 15 Months of Age. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Develop-
 ment, 1998, 63(4, No. 255).

 At around 1 year of age, human infants display a number of new behav-
 iors that seem to indicate a newly emerging understanding of other persons
 as intentional beings whose attention to outside objects may be shared, fol-
 lowed into, and directed in various ways. These behaviors have mostly been
 studied separately. In the current study, we investigated the most important
 of these behaviors together as they emerged in a single group of 24 infants
 between 9 and 15 months of age. At each of seven monthly visits, we measured
 joint attentional engagement, gaze and point following, imitation of two dif-
 ferent kinds of actions on objects, imperative and declarative gestures, and
 comprehension and production of language. We also measured several non-
 social-cognitive skills as a point of comparison.

 We report two studies. The focus of the first study was the initial emer-
 gence of infants' social-cognitive skills and how these skills are related to one
 another developmentally. We found a reliable pattern of emergence: Infants
 progressed from sharing to following to directing others' attention and behavior.
 The nonsocial skills did not emerge predictably in this developmental se-
 quence. Furthermore, correlational analyses showed that the ages of emer-
 gence of all pairs of the social-cognitive skills or their components were inter-
 related. The focus of the second study was the social interaction of infants
 and their mothers, especially with regard to their skills of joint attentional
 engagement (including mothers' use of language to follow into or direct in-
 fants' attention) and how these skills related to infants' early communicative
 competence. Our measures of communicative competence included not only
 language production, as in previous studies, but also language comprehen-
 sion and gesture production. It was found that two measures-the amount
 of time infants spent in joint engagement with their mothers and the degree

 V

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 to which mothers used language that followed into their infant's focus of
 attention-predicted infants' earliest skills of gestural and linguistic commu-
 nication.

 Results of the two studies are discussed in terms of their implications for
 theories of social-cognitive development, for theories of language develop-
 ment, and for theories of the process by means of which human children
 become fully participating members of the cultural activities and processes
 into which they are born.

 VI

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 I. INTRODUCTION

 Human cognition is in many ways a collective enterprise. Indeed, in one

 view, the major characteristic distinguishing the cognitive skills of human be-
 ings from those of other primate species is the ability to take advantage of
 the knowledge and skills of conspecifics, both present and past (Vygotsky,
 1978; Vygotsky & Luria, 1993). It is highly unlikely that a human infant, or
 even a group of human infants, raised in isolation from adults would invent
 for itself many of the material and symbolic artifacts or collective social prac-
 tices, including language, that constitute the truly unique aspects of human
 cognition. A central question of developmental psychology, therefore, is how
 it is that human children come initially to participate in the artifacts and
 social practices that constitute the collectivity of human cognition (Toma-
 sello, Kruger, & Ratner, 1993).

 Recent developmental theory and research has identified 1 year of age
 as an important milestone in this process. It is at around 1 year of age that
 infants for the first time begin to look where adults are looking flexibly and
 reliably, use adults as social reference points, and act on objects in the way
 adults are acting on them. At around this same age, infants also begin actively
 to direct adult attention to outside entities using intentionally communicative
 gestures; this achievement is soon followed by the acquisition of skills of lin-
 guistic communication. What all these skills have in common is that they in-
 volve the referential triangle of child, adult, and some third event or entity
 to which the participants share attention. The term joint attention has often
 been used to characterize this whole complex of social skills and interactions,
 and joint attention has been hypothesized to underlie the earliest forms of
 human cultural learning (see Tomasello, 1995a, and other papers in Moore &
 Dunham, 1995). Relatedly, researchers interested in children's later skills of
 social cognition and theory of mind have come to see skills of joint attention
 as precursors to the understanding of the thoughts and beliefs of others that
 emerges at around 4-5 years of age (see Baron-Cohen & Ring, 1994, and
 other papers in Lewis & Mitchell, 1994).

 Historically, the study of joint attention has been approached by re-

 searchers from two points of view, one based on ontogenetically earlier phe-

 1

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 nomena of infant social interaction and one based on ontogenetically later
 phenomena of intentional communication and language. From the point of
 view of earlier phenomena of infant social interaction, joint attention is the
 capstone of a long process that begins as newborn infants interact with
 adults face to face in "primary intersubjectivity" and ends as they begin to
 participate in bouts of "secondary intersubjectivity" with adults (Trevarthen,
 1979a). Secondary intersubjectivity, or joint attention, allows infants to incor-
 porate a third element into their dyadic interactions with other persons, thus
 making possible many kinds of triadic social interactions with people and
 objects.

 On the other hand, from the point of view of later phenomena of inten-
 tional communication and language during the second year of life and be-
 yond, joint attention represents not a capstone but a beginning point. Joint
 attentional interactions with other persons represent the initial "meeting of
 minds" that provides the foundation for all subsequent acts of communica-
 tion and cultural learning involving reference to the outside world (Bruner,
 1975a, 1975b, 1983). Once they are capable of entering into joint attentional
 interactions, infants begin to learn from and through others about the envi-
 ronment and about the artifacts used by members of their culture to mediate
 interactions with the environment (Cole, 1996; Rogoff, 1990). Viewed from
 both these perspectives simultaneously, then, the emergence of joint atten-
 tion may be seen as the crossroads where human infants meet the world of
 collective cognition in which they will reside for the rest of their lives (for
 an interesting discussion, see Adamson, 1995).

 In this Monograph, we are concerned with joint attention from both these
 points of view. We report two studies, both derived from our observations of
 24 infants who visited our laboratory at monthly intervals from 9 to 15 months
 of age. At each of these monthly visits, we obtained various measures of the
 infant's social-cognitive skills, we observed the infant and mother's social in-
 teractions, and we obtained maternal reports of the infant's communication
 and language skills. The focus of the first study was the initial emergence of
 infants' social-cognitive andjoint attentional skills and how these related to one
 another developmentally. The focus of the second study was infant and adult
 joint attentional skills in social interaction (joint engagement) and how these
 related to the infant's cultural learning ofgestural communication and linguistic
 skills. The remainder of this introduction is aimed at setting in context our spe-
 cific research questions and hypotheses for each of the two studies in turn.

 JOINT ATTENTION AS SOCIAL COGNITION

 Human infants are social creatures from birth. From the first hours of
 life, infants look selectively at pictures of schematic human faces over other

 2

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 patterns (Fantz, 1963; Morton & Johnson, 1991) and actively reproduce
 adults' facial and manual gestures (Meltzoff & Moore, 1977, 1989). There is
 even some evidence that infants are socially attuned before birth (Decasper
 & Fifer, 1980). Active social behavior increases dramatically at around 1-2
 months of age as infants begin to engage in direct face-to-face interactions
 with adults (Trevarthen, 1979a; Tronick, 1989), perhaps involving active turn
 taking (Murray & Trevarthen, 1985). Despite this high degree of sociality,
 however, in none of these interactive behaviors do infants demonstrate
 overtly a clear understanding that other persons are psychological agents with
 their own interests and attention to outside entities. Overt evidence for this
 understanding first emerges in the latter half of the first year of life as infants
 begin to incorporate outside objects into their social interactions with adults.

 Brief History and Definition

 During the mid- and late 1970s, researchers began to focus on three

 ways in which human infants begin to incorporate outside entities into their
 social interactions with others. These may be characterized as sharing attention,
 following attention, and directing attention. First, Trevarthen and Hubley (1978)
 studied how infants went from their early dyadic interactions, with either per-
 sons or objects, to triadic interactions in which they share attention to an ob-
 ject with another person. These triadic interactions typically emerge at
 around 9 months of age and include such things as actively giving and re-
 questing objects from the mother. Second, Scaife and Bruner (1975) studied
 the extent to which infants 2-14 months of age follow the gaze direction of
 an adult to an object, with the purpose of determining at what age infants
 understand that other persons have interest and attention into which they
 might follow. Third, Bates, Camaioni, and Volterra (1975) studied 8-12-
 month-old infants' use of nonverbal gestures to direct another person to ob-
 jects in which they themselves were interested. These researchers distin-
 guished between gestures designed to get adults to do something (impera-
 tives) and those simply designed to direct adults' attention to an entity of
 potential common interest (declaratives).

 There is currently much controversy over the nature of the infant social
 cognition that underlies these emerging triadic behaviors. Some theorists be-
 lieve that human infants have adult-like social cognition from birth and that
 the emergence of these triadic behaviors at 9-12 months of age simply re-
 flects the development of behavioral performance skills for manifesting this
 cognition in overt behavior (e.g., Trevarthen, 1979b). Other theorists believe
 that infants are preprogrammed with several independent social-cognitive
 modules-including an eye direction detector, an intention detector, and a
 shared attention mechanism-each with its own predetermined develop-
 mental timetable that is affected neither by the ontogeny of the other mod-

 3

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 ules nor by the organism's interactions with the social environment (e.g.,
 Baron-Cohen, 1995). Finally, still other theorists believe that infants' triadic
 interactions at 9-12 months of age represent learned behavioral sequences,
 at least somewhat independent of one another (although underlain by a com-
 mon information-processing mechanism), that do not initially rest on deep
 social-cognitive understandings of other persons at all (e.g., Moore, 1996).
 Our theoretical perspective will follow the lead of Tomasello (1995a),

 who attempted to provide a single theoretical foundation for the different
 manifestations of joint attention by positing that infants engage in joint atten-
 tional interactions when they understand other persons as intentional agents.
 Intentional agents are animate beings with the power to control their sponta-
 neous behavior, but they are more than that. Intentional agents have goals
 and make active choices among behavioral means for attaining those goals.
 Also, and novel to this account, intentional agents make active choices about
 what they pay attention to in pursuing those goals (for the argument that
 attention is intentional perception, see Gibson & Rader, 1979). All the spe-
 cific joint attentional behaviors in which infants share, follow, or direct adult
 attention and behavior are simply different manifestations of this underlying
 understanding of other persons as intentional agents (for a similar account
 based on the notion of intersubjective awareness, see Baldwin, 1995). At least
 some support for this view is provided by developmental synchronies in the
 emergence of the different overt manifestations of joint attention at 9-12
 months as well as by habituation studies indicating that infants first discrimi-
 nate goal-directed behavior from other types of behavior at 9 months of age
 (Csibra, Gergely, Bir6, & Koos, in press; Gergely, NMdasdy, Csibra, & Bir6,
 1995).

 How to identify joint attentional behaviors in practice is not a question

 that has enjoyed as much discussion. Operationally, a key feature of each of
 the three types of joint attentional behavior is that at some point the infant
 alternates gaze between person and object, for example, looking back to the
 adult for a reaction as she points to a salient event. But gaze alternation is
 not an infallible indicator of joint attention if one is interested in the infant's
 ability to monitor the adult's attention to an outside entity. For example, it
 would not be considered joint attention if an infant playing with a toy was
 suddenly startled by an adult's voice or movement and so looked up to the
 adult's face. There is no monitoring of attention here, only a case of two
 entities grabbing the infant's attention alternately.

 A similar interpretation might be applicable to many cases in which in-
 fants "check back" with adults as if to assure themselves of the adults' pres-
 ence, as has been described so often in studies of infants' attachment to adults
 (e.g., Ainsworth, 1973). These checking-back behaviors may not be triadic in
 many cases because the infant is not integrating attention to the object and
 the person in one interaction, or monitoring the adult's attention, but only

 4

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 switching attention from the one to the other. More convincing in these types
 of situations from the point of view of joint attention is social referencing
 behavior in which the infant seeks to determine the adult's reaction to an
 object and then uses this reaction in deciding how to interact with that object;
 this would seem to incorporate much more clearly a triadic dimension in
 which there is a monitoring of the adult's psychological relation to the object
 (Campos & Stenberg, 1981; Walden & Ogan, 1988).

 In the three different types of joint attentional interaction, therefore,

 there may be precursor forms of the behaviors that involve some key opera-
 tional features (e.g., gaze alternation) but that do not involve the most impor-
 tant feature from a social-cognitive point of view: the infant's understanding
 that the other person is an intentional being like me whose attention to the
 world may be shared, followed into, or directed. We will examine each of
 these three major manifestations of early joint attention in turn, with the aim
 in each case of identifying the age at which infants first show evidence of this
 understanding.

 Sharing Attention

 By definition, all joint attentional skills involve infants sharing attention

 with a partner in some manner. We are concerned here, however, with rela-
 tively extended episodes of joint attentional engagement in which adult and
 infant share attention to an object of mutual interest over some measurable
 period of time (at least a few seconds). The prototypical example of an epi-
 sode of joint attentional engagement is a situation in which adult and infant
 are playing with a toy and the infant looks from the toy to the adult's face
 and back to the toy. Such joint-engagement episodes may also include other
 joint attentional behaviors, such as pointing or following the adult's gaze to
 another object, but our concern here is with these extended periods of shared
 attention themselves, as characterized mainly by the infant's gaze alternation
 between object and adult. To avoid terminological confusion, we use the term
 joint attentional engagement, or simply joint engagement, for this basically interac-
 tive form of sharing attention; we use the terms joint attentional behaviors or
 joint attentional skills (or social-cognitive skills) to refer to the whole complex
 of infant abilities involving the sharing of attention, including such things as
 gaze following, imitative learning, and gestural communication.

 In practice, because the adult's attention to and awareness of infant at-
 tention may be taken for granted, and because visual attention is the most
 directly observable measure of attention, joint-engagement episodes are typi-
 cally operationally defined by the infant's alternation of gaze between an ob-
 ject and the adult's face, especially the eyes. Minimally, the infant must be
 engaged with an object on which the adult is also focused, then demonstrate
 her awareness of the adult's focus by looking to her face, and then return to

 5

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 engagement with the object. This last step is important because it demon-
 strates that the infant has not simply switched attention from the object to
 the adult but rather incorporated her attention to the adult in the context
 of her engagement with the object.

 Yet, as previously argued, gaze alternation is neither the only indicator
 nor an automatic indicator of joint engagement. That is, in the first case,
 joint engagement with an object and another individual does not have to be
 visual joint engagement; infants could conceivably be visually focused on an
 object while attending only auditorily to the other individual. This is typically
 not measured in studies of joint engagement. Nor, in the second case, is gaze
 alternation a definitive indicator of joint engagement; infants could look to
 an adult's face in direct response to a noise, utterance, or movement by the
 adult and then return to the object. In this case, their look would be more
 accurately described as alternation of attention rather than as coordination
 of attention, in which the infant actively monitors and assesses the attention
 of the other to the object (for further discussion of this issue, see Bakeman &
 Adamson, 1984; Tomasello, 1995a). Nevertheless, despite limitations in the
 operationalization of this phenomenon, joint engagement remains an impor-
 tant indicator of infants' ability to coordinate and share attention to objects
 with social partners.

 Given the amount of discussion concerning the role of joint engagement

 in the development of everything from language to theory of mind, there
 have been surprisingly few investigations of extended periods of joint engage-
 ment in the first year of life. The first was Trevarthen and Hubley's (1978)
 descriptive study of the early intersubjective development of one infant. The
 infant, Tracey, was observed in a laboratory 32 times during her first year of
 life. Tracey was seated in an infant seat, her mother was instructed to play
 with and talk to her, and the ensuing interactions were filmed. In her first
 6 months, Tracey showed interest in both objects and her mother, but she
 showed no evidence of coordinating the two. Between 6 and 8 months, Tracey
 glanced occasionally to her mother's eyes during object play, and she watched
 her mother carefully during a game in which she made her mother move in
 synchrony with her own actions on an object. Between 8 and 9 months of
 age, Tracey began to exchange smiles with her mother while playing with
 blocks, and, at 10 months, Tracey began for the first time to look to her
 mother's face concerning the object, for example, when receiving it or when
 something entertaining was done to it. The more recent findings of Saxon,
 Frick, and Colombo (1997) also suggest 8-9 months as a key age in the emer-
 gence of joint engagement.

 A larger and more systematic investigation into the developmental
 course of joint engagement was conducted by Bakeman and Adamson (1984).
 These researchers followed the joint-engagement skills of 28 infants longitu-
 dinally at 3-month intervals between the ages of 6 and 18 months. Mothers

 6

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 were asked to play with their infants-at home with a standard set of toys-
 as they might if they had a few minutes to devote to a spontaneous play pe-
 riod. This play was videotaped for 10 minutes. Infants' engagement states
 were coded as Unengaged, Onlooking (infant observing mother's activity with-
 out participating), Persons (infant engaging in face-to-face interaction with
 mother), Objects (infant playing only with object), Passive Joint (infant and
 mother playing together with the same object but infant showing no aware-
 ness of mother's participation or even presence), or Coordinated Joint (infant
 actively coordinating visual attention to both object and mother, i.e., joint
 engagement).

 Bakeman and Adamson found that the frequency of occurrence of joint

 engagement, the percentage of time spent in joint engagement, and the
 mean duration of joint-engagement episodes all increased with age. Thus,
 whereas only about a third of 6- and 9-month-olds were observed at least
 once in coordinated joint engagement with their mother, 68% of 12-month-
 olds, 89% of 15-month-olds, and all the 18-month-olds engaged in joint en-
 gagement at least once (Adamson & Bakeman, 1985). Similarly, the mean
 percentage of time that infants spent in joint engagement increased signifi-
 cantly with age: time in joint engagement tripled between 12 and 15 months
 and then more than doubled again between 15 and 18 months (still, for in-
 fants of all ages, this percentage was relatively low, ranging only from 2%
 to 27%). The mean duration of joint-engagement episodes also increased
 significantly with age. The joint-engagement episodes of 18-month-olds were
 over three times longer on average than those of 12-month-olds. (For a study
 of joint engagement from 18 to 24 months of age, see Rocissano & Yatch-
 mink, 1984.)

 These findings indicate a relatively long period of time between the age
 at which infants first are capable of joint engagement and the age at which
 extended bouts of joint engagement become a significant part of their inter-
 actions with adults. Only a third of the 9-month-olds engaged in joint engage-
 ment at all (and then only for 2%, on average, of the total play period); 15-
 and 18-month-olds were the first to spend more than 10% of the session
 engaged in coordinated joint engagement, and it was not until 18 months
 that each infant was observed in coordinated joint engagement at least once.
 On the one hand, these low frequencies suggest the possibility that the earli-
 est manifestations of joint engagement may not reflect a deep understanding
 of others as intentional beings. For example, infants' looks to mothers during
 object play could conceivably be conditioned responses to their mothers'
 smiles, contingent vocalizations, and other expressions of pleasure and inter-
 est (Moore & Corkum, 1994), or, similarly, infants might simply be checking
 for mother's presence, as is commonly described in the literature on infant
 attachment, which again would indicate something other than a monitoring
 of adult intentional relations to the world (Baldwin & Moses, 1996). On the

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 7

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 other hand, however, it is also possible that infants are capable of triadic
 intersubjective interactions even earlier than 9 months of age but that some
 other factor, such as the ability to coordinate attention to multiple items or
 motor limitations, constrains them from showing this capacity with any fre-
 quency until relatively late in infancy (Trevarthen, 1979b).

 Limitations of the existing studies of joint engagement preclude any de-
 finitive conclusions regarding the age of emergence of truly coordinated at-
 tention to objects and adults. For example, Rutter and Durkin (1987) re-
 ported that 9-36-month-old infants looked most to their mothers while
 mothers were vocalizing, and mothers in Bakeman and Adamson's (1984)
 study were later found to vocalize at a rate of over 16 utterances per minute
 (Smith, Adamson, & Bakeman, 1988)--which might suggest that infants were
 looking to their mothers only in response to something they said. Insofar as
 current results do depict the true state of affairs, however, we may conclude
 that infants first begin to engage in extended episodes of joint engagement
 with others at around 9 months of age but that such episodes do not occur
 frequently until 15-18 months of age or later. It should also be stressed that,
 to a much greater degree than the more individual measures of infants' joint
 attentional skills, such as gaze following and gestures, the amount of joint
 engagement in which infants participate at all ages depends in large measure
 on the skills and motivations of their social partners (Bakeman & Adamson,
 1984) and on contextual factors (Ross & Lollis, 1987).

 Following Attention and Behavior

 It is difficult to know what infants understand of their social partners as
 intentional agents when they are looking to them and engaging with them
 in these extended periods of joint engagement. But when infants begin to
 follow into the attention or behavior of others in certain specific ways, a much
 more compelling case can be made that they understand something about
 the other person as an intentional agent. In particular, infants may follow
 into the attention of others by following the direction of their visual gaze or
 manual pointing gesture to an outside object, and they may follow into the
 behavior of others by imitating their physical actions on an object. Again, our
 main concern here is to identify the age at which infants seem to engage in
 these behaviors in a way that indicates some understanding of the adult's
 psychological relation or attention to the outside world.

 Gaze Following

 Gaze following may be seen as simply "looking where someone else is
 looking" (Butterworth, 1991b, p. 223), but to be of interest in the current

 8

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 context it must involve the infant monitoring the adult's attention to some
 degree. Thus, for example, if a toy makes an unexpected noise that attracts
 the attention of both infant and adult, the infant's look to the toy is a result
 of the attention-compelling properties of the toy rather than a monitoring
 of adult attention. Nor should we include cases in which the infant learns
 over repeated exposure that, when the adult does something (e.g., turns her
 head), an interesting sight is to be found in a certain direction. If the gaze
 direction of the adult is learned as a discriminative cue whose connection to
 phenomena in the outside world is not understood (as, perhaps, the sound
 of the alarm clock signals that a look toward the door will soon yield percep-
 tion of Mommy), then it is not really attention following at all.

 Scaife and Bruner (1975) conducted the first systematic study of infants'
 ability to follow the gaze of other persons. Infants in this study were seated
 facing an adult. For each trial, after establishing eye contact with the infant,
 the adult shifted his direction of gaze, turning his head, to one of several
 locations in the room. No targets that infants could see were used; the experi-
 menter simply fixated on concealed marks on the wall. Using a cross-sectional
 design, these researchers tested 24 infants in the age range of 2-14 months.
 Results indicated that 30% of 2-4-month-olds, 39% of 5-7-month-olds, 67%
 of 8-10-month-olds, and 100% of 11-14-month-olds followed the adult's line
 of regard on at least one of two trials. Furthermore, 80% of "negative trials"
 involved no response: when infants responded, they usually did not turn in
 the wrong direction. These results would appear to suggest that even infants
 as young as 2-4 months of age can follow others' direction of gaze.

 The problem is that proper interpretation of these findings requires

 some accounting of the probability that the infant will match the direction
 of the adult's head turn simply by chance. Collis (1977) calculated the proba-
 bility of a positive response in at least one of the two trials by chance in this
 experiment and discovered that only infants older than 8 months were re-
 sponding at levels higher than chance. This conclusion accords with Scaife
 and Bruner's observation that infants in the older groups often were observed
 to engage in checking, or "looking away, looking back at the experimenter
 and then looking away again," as if they were "looking for something to look
 at" (p. 265).

 Churcher and Scaife (1982) attempted to replicate these findings with
 infants from 3 to 8 months of age, looking also at point following. The prob-
 lem here was that they reported only ages of first occurrences of these behav-
 iors, not frequencies or percentages, so there is no way to compare the ob-
 served results with those to be expected by chance. They do mention,
 however, that the most common response at all the ages studied was a look
 to the experimenter's eyes or to the pointing hand, "in a word, the appear-
 ance of total incomprehension" (p. 120). Corkum and Moore (1995, study
 2) conducted a much more systematic study of infant gaze following-using

 9

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 the same general procedures as Scaife and Bruner (1975) but with more ex-
 perimental controls-and found that it was not until around 10 months of
 age that infants reliably followed the direction of adult gaze. (But, for some
 findings suggesting an earlier age, at least for targets close at hand, see
 D'Entremont, Hains, & Muir, 1997.)

 On the basis of these studies, then, it appears that 8-10 months is the
 earliest age at which infants may be said to be following the general gaze
 direction of others. Other studies have attempted to explore infants' ability
 to use adult gaze to locate a specific target when there are several possible
 candidates in the general line of regard. For example, in a longitudinal study
 in which infants were observed every 3 months between 6 and 18 months,
 Morissette, Ricard, and Gouin-Decarie (1995) found that the age at which
 infants first could locate the correct target of the experimenter's look varied
 according to the angle and distance of the target with regard to the infant.
 Thus, only at 15 months (i.e., at some point between 12 and 15 months) did
 infants first begin to respond correctly when targets were located near and
 at a narrow angle with respect to them; only beginning at around 18 months
 did they respond correctly when targets were positioned at greater distances
 and angles.

 Butterworth and his colleagues also varied target locations, this time with

 respect to position in the infants' scan path and visual field. At 6 months of
 age, infants in these studies looked to the same side of the room as the adult
 but were unable to locate correctly the particular target the adult fixated
 when more than one target was present (Butterworth, 1991a; Butterworth &
 Jarrett, 1991). When targets were presented one at a time, however, 6-month-
 olds accurately localized targets in their visual field (Butterworth & Cochran,
 1980; Butterworth & Jarrett, 1991). At 12 months of age, infants were just
 beginning to be able to respond correctly when the target was the second
 object along their scan path (Butterworth & Jarrett, 1991). They were, how-
 ever, still unable to localize targets behind them, outside their visual fields
 (Butterworth & Cochran, 1980; Butterworth & Jarrett, 1991). Infants at 18
 months of age responded correctly whether targets were first or second along
 their scan path, and they could also search behind themselves, but only when
 their visual field contained no distractor targets (Butterworth & Cochran,
 1980; Butterworth & Jarrett, 1991).

 These results suggest that it is only between 12 and 15 months of age
 that infants begin to use adult gaze direction in a precise way to locate specific
 targets when distractors are also present. Several other studies have attempted
 to determine more precisely the cue that infants are using when they follow
 the gaze direction of others, that is, whether they use adults' head or eye
 orientation. In tasks comparing infants' responses when the experimenters
 turned their head and eyes together to targets with their responses when the
 experimenters directed their eyes to the targets but their head remained fac-

 10

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 ing forward, Corkum and Moore (1995), Lempers (1979), and Lempers, Fla-
 vell, and Flavell (1977) all found that only infants age 12 months and older
 responded correctly when eyes and head were oriented in the same direction
 and that infants at all ages (i.e., through 19 months) performed poorly when
 eye and head direction diverged.

 Although there are some inconsistencies due to differences in scoring

 criteria, position of targets, cues, and task requirements, findings across the
 studies of gaze following are relatively consistent in some respects. Infants
 begin to follow adult gaze direction consistently at around 10 months of age,
 and they begin to use gaze direction to locate specific targets more precisely
 during the period between 12 and 15 months. The extent to which infants
 can do these things without the use of head direction-using eye direction
 only-is currently not resolved, but in any case it is certainly not until after
 these other developments.

 Point Following

 Most of the studies of infants' comprehension of pointing gestures use
 methodologies very similar to those used for gaze following. In general, no
 studies have found that infants younger than 9 months of age show any evi-
 dence of comprehending the attentional significance of pointing. For in-
 stance, Butterworth and Grover (1988, 1990) reported that 6- and 9-month-
 olds were just as likely to fixate their mother's pointing hand as they were to
 fixate the target to which she was pointing. Again, situational factors, such
 as the location of the target relative to the adult and infant, affect younger
 infants' performance. Lempers (1979) found that 9-month-olds could cor-
 rectly fixate only nearby targets located in the space between them and the
 adult, not more distal targets. The form of the adult's points also has a strong
 effect on younger infants' point following. Murphy and Messer (1977) re-
 ported that, when sitting beside their mothers, 9-month-olds followed points
 only when mothers pointed sideways away from the infants to a target on
 their side. Points directed forward and across the infant were not yet followed
 at this age.

 In contrast, by 12 months of age, most infants reliably fixate targets in-

 stead of their mother's hand (Butterworth & Grover, 1988, 1990). Infants at
 this age are also capable of following points both to nearby and to distant
 targets (Lempers, 1979). By 14 months of age, infants in Murphy and Messer's
 (1977) study were able to follow points regardless of their form (i.e., forward
 or away from or across the infant). However, Desrochers, Morissette, and Ri-
 card (1995) and Morissette et al. (1995) did not find evidence of comprehen-
 sion of pointing until 15 months of age. So, as in the case of gaze following,
 the age at which infants are able to locate a specific target when other objects
 are present in the immediate environment is 12-15 months. As additional

 11

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 evidence that infants do indeed understand something of adult attention in
 these interactions-as opposed to simply using head turning or pointing as
 discriminative cues-some investigators have also pointed out that infants of
 this age often check with adults after the gaze or point following; that is, they
 follow the adult's gaze or point and then look back to the adult for some
 kind of confirmation. This behavior suggests that infants understand that the
 adult is looking at something and that they need to confirm that they have
 fixated the correct object. Infants were observed to engage in checking
 "often" between 8 and 14 months by Scaife and Bruner (1975, p. 265) and
 "sometimes" at 12.5 months by Butterworth and Cochran (1980, p. 262).

 Thus, on the basis of the emergence of correct localization of targets,
 with some checking back with the adult, we can tentatively conclude that
 infants engage in true attention following (of gaze and points) during the
 age period between 12 and 15 months. With regard to comparing the two
 versions of attention following, several studies have found that point following
 tends to emerge before gaze following (e.g., Butterworth, 1991a; Lempers,
 1979; Lempers et al., 1977; Morissette et al., 1995), although in some of these
 studies (those by Lempers and his colleagues) the positions and distances of
 the targets with respect to the infant and the adult differed for the gaze-
 and point-following tasks, making comparison difficult. More information is
 needed about additional infant behaviors, such as checking, in these two situ-
 ations.

 Imitative Learning

 Imitation is not included among joint attentional behaviors in most theo-
 retical analyses, perhaps because there are many types of imitation and social
 learning that do not require the coordination of intentions/attention to ex-
 ternal objects. For example, human neonates reproduce some adult facial
 gestures within minutes after birth (e.g., Meltzoff & Moore, 1977, 1989; Reiss-
 land, 1988). Although there is some debate about the existence and nature
 of this skill (Anisfeld, 1991; Jones, 1996), for current purposes the crucial
 issue is that there are no outside objects involved; infant and adult are fo-
 cused on one another directly in face-to-face interaction. The kind of imita-
 tion with which we are concerned here has to do with infants following into
 adult behavior on an outside object. This focus is necessary because only in
 these kinds of triadic situations is it possible to discern whether infants are
 actually monitoring the adult's intentions and attention toward something in
 the environment. Furthermore, the very best evidence that infants are moni-
 toring something of the adult's psychological states toward the object is when
 they learn a new behavior toward it as a result of the observation, thus demon-
 strating an active adaptation to the adult's relation to the object. We call this
 imitative learning.

 12

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 Many early studies of imitation of actions on objects lacked appropriate

 controls. For example, Pawlby (1977) observed eight infants in weekly, un-
 structured interactions with their mothers from age 4 months to approxi-
 mately 10 months. She found many instances of "imitation" of simple actions
 on objects, for example, shaking objects or banging them together. Infants'
 reproduction of mothers' actions increased almost tenfold between 4 and 10
 months of age. The problem is that it is impossible in such cases to know
 whether infants were truly imitating their mothers. Pawlby includes no men-
 tion either of the spontaneous rate of the "imitated" actions (i.e., the rate
 at which infants performed those actions in the absence of a demonstration)
 or of the proportion of instances in which mothers attempted unsuccessfully
 to get their infants to imitate. Thus, the infants in this study might have been
 performing the only actions that those particular objects readily afforded,
 with older infants more capable of performing those actions than younger
 infants. This issue is also an issue for the studies of Piaget (1962) and other
 researchers, such as Masur and Ritz (1984), McCall, Eichorn, and Hogarty
 (1977), and Rodgon and Kurdek (1977), all of whom report imitation of fa-
 miliar actions on objects in the age range 7-10 months. In addition, in all
 these studies, the actions were extremely simple (e.g., dangling a ring on a
 string or hitting two blocks together), and therefore learning of a new behav-
 ior was very likely not involved in most cases.

 To address these issues, other studies have included control groups of
 various types. For example, Abravanel, Levan-Goldschmidt, and Stevenson
 (1976) observed infants at 3-month intervals longitudinally from 6 to 18
 months and also cross-sectionally from 6 to 15 months. They included a con-
 trol group of infants at each of the ages studied in the cross-sectional group
 in order to assess spontaneous production of the modeled actions. When only
 those actions that were produced more frequently by the modeling group
 than the control group were considered, a significant increase in infants' imi-
 tation scores (including partial imitations) was found to occur between 9 and
 12 and between 12 and 15 months of age. Again in this study, however, the
 actions and objects used were mostly familiar to the infants, and there is
 therefore no clear evidence that the infants were actually learning a novel
 behavior.

 Killen and Uzgiris (1981) and McCabe and Uzgiris (1983), on the other
 hand, demonstrated for 7-22-month-old infants a variety of actions that were
 novel in the sense that they were performed with conventionally inappropri-
 ate and "abstractly shaped" objects, for example, "drinking" from a toy car
 and "hugging" a piece of wood (for a discussion of the different types of
 novelty, see Meltzoff, 1988a). Both pairs of investigators reported that imita-
 tion of these actions increased with age, with very little imitation of this type
 until 12-16 months. McCall, Parke, and Kavanaugh (1977) created other
 kinds of novelty in that they demonstrated actions on objects that they them-

 13

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 selves had created (and replaced the few actions that infants performed spon-
 taneously in free play with alternate actions). Examples of target actions in-
 cluded rocking a semicircular block and making a rattle out of two cups and
 a small cube. Results indicated that 12-month-olds successfully imitated fewer
 than 30% of the simpler actions on objects and only 5% of the complex ones
 requiring two steps. Fifteen- and 18-month-olds showed somewhat higher lev-
 els (40%-60%) of imitation of the simpler actions, but even 18-month-olds
 imitated fewer than a quarter of the more complex actions. Abravanel and
 Gingold (1985) presented 12- and 18-month-olds with such things as a rag
 doll stuffed inside a transparent cylinder (the target action was pushing the
 doll out with a drumstick) and a xylophone (the action was removing one
 of the xylophone's keys and striking the other two keys with it). They found
 no effect of modeling for the 12-month-olds-the infants reproduced the
 target actions no more frequently than did same-aged infants in control
 groups who had seen no demonstration-but they did find an effect for the
 18-month-olds.

 Only a few studies of imitation have included additional controls to rule

 out forms of social learning other than imitation. For example, it may be
 that, when adults pick up and play with an object, infants are likely to follow
 suit, that is, to become more interested in manipulating that object as well.
 Stimulus enhancement of this type is well known to occur with a variety of
 animal species in social learning situations as well (for a review, see Zentall,
 1996). The problem is that stimulus enhancement effects make it more likely
 that infants will actively manipulate objects, thus raising the baseline probabil-
 ity that they will perform the target action without paying any attention to the
 demonstration at all. A variation of stimulus enhancement is called emulation
 learning (Tomasello, 1990, 1994); in emulation learning, infants see in the
 adult demonstration some affordances of the object that they might not have
 discovered on their own and then want to reproduce them.' It is important
 to distinguish this interesting and important form of social learning from
 imitative learning because it is a process in which infants learn about objects
 instead of about the attention or behavior of other human beings. There is
 also the possibility in some cases that children may mimic an adult motor
 pattern without understanding its intentional significance, the way that a par-
 rot mimics human speech; this process should also be distinguished from
 imitative learning (Tomasello, 1996a).

 Only a few studies have included the control conditions necessary to
 demonstrate that infants are indeed reproducing a novel action by following

 ' Note that, if there is only one readily available behavioral means that may be used to

 exploit an affordance of an object for a given species, it may appear as though one individual
 is imitating another when in fact the attempt for both is simply to reproduce the affordance
 in the easiest manner.

 14

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 into adult attention and behavior. First, Meltzoff (1988b) randomly assigned
 9-month-olds to one of four groups: an imitation group, which received mod-
 els, and three control groups that did not. The control groups included a
 baseline control group, in which infants were simply given the objects to play
 with; an "adult-touching" control group, in which the experimenter only
 passively held objects instead of modeling actions on them; and an "adult-
 manipulation" control group, in which the experimenter demonstrated the
 end results of the target actions using different means from those modeled
 for the imitation group. These last two controls were designed to address
 the possibility that any reproduction of the model could be due to stimulus
 enhancement and/or emulation as opposed to imitation. Results indicated
 that half the infants in the imitation group reproduced two or more of
 the three demonstrated actions; fewer than 20% of them imitated all three
 actions. One problem here is that the emulation-affordances explanation
 might still hold in some cases. For example, one of the modeled actions was
 pressing a button on a box to produce a beeping noise. Infants in the adult-
 manipulation condition were shown that the box could make a beeping
 noise, but they were not shown that the button on the box could be pressed.
 This information might be all that the infants in the imitation group tuned
 in to.

 A stronger demonstration of imitative learning in infants was provided

 by Meltzoff (1988a). In this study, 14-month-olds were shown a number of
 actions on objects, one of which is of special interest here. The object was a
 box with a translucent panel on top that lit up when touched. The action
 demonstrated was bending forward at the waist and touching the forehead
 to the light panel. This task is especially interesting in the current context,
 not only because this action was convincingly demonstrated to be novel (over
 two dozen pilot subjects as well as the 24 control subjects in the study never
 once produced it), but also because there is clearly more than one behav-
 ioral means to produce the end result. Indeed, it might be supposed that the
 most straightforward way for the infants to depress and thereby to illuminate
 the light panel would be to touch it with their hand. Meltzoff found that
 two-thirds of the infants in the imitation group imitated the unusual head-
 touching action even though 1 week had elapsed between the demonstration
 and the infants' first opportunity to imitate. Although simple mimicry is possi-
 ble in this situation (i.e., infants might have reproduced the adult's action
 with no understanding of its intended result), this seems unlikely given Melt-
 zoff's report that infants "directly and confidently set about producing the
 target actions when given the test objects" (Meltzoff, 1988a, p. 473) and, after
 successful imitation, often looked up to the adult and smiled. Similar results
 were obtained by Tomasello, Savage-Rumbaugh, and Kruger (1993), who
 found that 18-month-olds, the youngest children studied, reproduced both
 means and end result on the majority of their "simple" tasks and a significant

 15

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 minority of their "complex" tasks, most of which had multiple possible
 means to the modeled end result.

 Finally, two recent studies have tested more directly what infants un-
 derstand about others' intentions using imitation paradigms. In the first,
 Meltzoff (1995) presented 18-month-old infants with two types of demonstra-
 tions (along with the control demonstrations from his previous studies-
 see above). Infants in the target demonstration group saw the adult perform
 actions on objects, much as in Meltzoff's previous studies. Infants in the in-
 tention demonstration group, however, saw the adult try but fail to achieve
 the end results of the target actions; for example, the adult tried to pull two
 parts of an object apart but never succeeded in separating them (infants in
 this group thus never saw the target actions performed). Meltzoff found that
 infants in both these groups reproduced the target actions equally well; that
 is, they appeared to understood what the adult intended to do and performed
 that action instead of mimicking the adult's actual surface behavior.

 In the second study, infants' understanding of others' intentions was in-
 vestigated from a different point of view. Whereas Meltzoff (1995) presented
 infants with demonstrations of unfulfilled intentions, Carpenter, Akhtar, and
 Tomasello (1998) studied infants' imitation of accidental and intentional ac-
 tions. In this study, 14-18-month-old infants watched an adult perform some
 two-action sequences on objects that made interesting results occur. One ac-
 tion of the modeled sequences was marked vocally as intentional ("There!"),
 and one action was marked vocally as accidental ("Woops!")--with order
 systematically manipulated across sequences. Infants were then given a
 chance to make the result occur themselves. Overall, infants imitated almost
 twice as many of the adult's intentional actions as her accidental ones, indicat-
 ing that they differentiated between the two types of actions and that they
 were able to reproduce, again, what the adult meant to do and not her actual
 surface behavior.

 Reproducing adults' behavior is something infants do from a very early

 age. The primary issue of concern here is when they reproduce actions on
 objects in a way that allows us to be confident that they are tuning in to the
 adult's intentions and attention on outside entities. The first clear evidence
 of this is found at around 14 months of age, although the performance of
 some infants at 9 months of age is suggestive.

 Summary

 Attention following and imitation are not typically discussed as two in-

 stances of the same underlying phenomenon. But both involve the infant
 seeing the adult do something toward an outside entity and then attempting
 to follow into the adult's intentions and attention in the situation. It might
 be hypothesized that imitative learning is the more difficult of these skills

 16

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 because both gaze following and point following require only that the infant
 turn her head-something that she has been doing in orienting behaviors
 from soon after birth-whereas imitative learning requires the production of
 behaviors that are in most cases more complex and in all cases at least some-
 what more novel. However, to our knowledge, no studies have examined
 these skills longitudinally in the same group of children to see if this is indeed
 the case.

 Directing Attention and Behavior

 Human infants demonstrate their understanding of adults as intentional
 agents, not only by following into their attention and behavior, but also by
 attempting to direct their attention and behavior to outside entities through
 acts of intentional communication. Under the broadest definition, even in-
 fants' earliest behavior is communicative in the sense that adults are able to
 interpret it and respond appropriately; for example, a newborn's cries may
 indicate to her mother that she is hungry or in pain, or an infant's reach
 toward an object may indicate to her father that she wishes to have that ob-
 ject. But intentional communication refers to those instances in which the
 infant "realizes as he emits his signals that they will serve a communicative
 purpose"; the signals are "aimed at the adult listener, [instead of] at the
 goal itself" (Bates, Benigni, Bretherton, Camaioni, & Volterra, 1979, p. 34).
 Given an infant signal of some kind (a ritualized behavior not physically effec-
 tive in obtaining a goal by itself) that is produced intentionally (indicated
 by persistence, sometimes with alternating means, until the goal is reached),
 the main evidence that infants' behavior is intentionally communicative is
 that they direct their signals toward another person, alternating their gaze
 between that person and the goal. Such behavior indicates that infants under-
 stand the other person, not just as another physical object to be physically
 manipulated, but as a communicative partner who can perceive and respond
 to their signals.

 Bates et al. (1975) observed two main purposes for which infants inten-

 tionally communicate with adults about outside entities. On the one hand,
 infants may desire an object or activity and therefore attempt to direct the
 adult's behavior to help obtain that goal; for example, the infant may reach
 to an object in a stylized manner (e.g., opening and closing hand), whine,
 and look to her mother. Because they request adult behavior, these are called
 imperative gestures. On the other hand, infants may simply desire that the adult
 attend to something in the environment, to share attention to it; for example,
 the infant may hold up an object to show it to an adult. Because they request
 adult attention, not behavior, these are called declarative gestures. Intentional
 communication for either of these purposes involves the infant's understand-
 ing that adults are psychological beings whose intentions and attention may

 17

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 be brought into line with their own intentions and attention. It should be
 noted that the best-known infant gesture-pointing-may serve either of
 these functions. The development of imperatives and declaratives will be dis-
 cussed in turn.

 Imperatives

 Infants reach for objects and whine from a fairly early age, but, for these

 behaviors to be considered intentional communication, there must be some
 evidence that the infants are directing their reaching and whining to the
 adult whose behavior they wish to influence, not to the object itself. The prob-
 lem is that infants may learn associatively that certain behaviors on their part
 reliably lead to certain results without any understanding of the role of the
 other person (G6mez, Sarriat, & Tamarit, 1993). A look to the other during
 the act of communication would, then, reflect only an expectation that the
 other was about to react-the way an infant might look to the ground expec-
 tantly as she dropped an object-not any understanding that the other per-
 son must perceive the signal and then decide what to do about it. It is for
 this reason that some researchers have insisted that the infant's looks to the
 communicative partner be directed at the face. On the assumption that in-
 fants will look to the parts of the adult that are relevant to achieving their
 goal, looks to the adult's hands or legs would indicate infants' understanding
 of the adult as an animate object who was about to move and do something,
 but a look to the face, which is not directly involved in moving the adult
 or achieving any physical goal, is a much better indication that the infant
 understands the adult as a psychological being.

 Bates et al. (1975) were among the first to examine infants' intentionally

 communicative gestures in detail. For example, they observed an infant just
 under 10 months of age attempting to obtain a box that her mother was
 holding in her arms by pulling at her mother's arms, pushing her whole
 body against the floor, and approaching the box from different angles-with-
 out once looking up at the mother's face. By 11 or 12 months, however,
 this infant had begun to alternate her gaze between a desired object and
 the adult's face when requesting; at around 13 months, she began to in-
 clude requestive pointing in these sequences. Interestingly, another infant at
 around 12 months did not always look at the adult during her initial com-
 mand, but, if the listener failed to respond, she would look to the adult's
 face and issue a more insistent command. Similar results were obtained
 in further studies by Bates and her colleagues with larger samples. Bates
 et al. (1979), for example, found that requests increased steadily in terms
 of both frequency and ritualization during the period between 9 and 13

 18

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 months, although this study included no measure of gaze direction (with
 the result that looks specifically to the face could not be determined). Like-
 wise, Bretherton, McNew, and Beeghly-Smith (1981) determined by maternal
 report that, whereas 10'/2-month-olds only rarely requested objects by point-
 ing or other ritualized motions or sounds, half to two-thirds of 13-month-
 olds did so.

 Other researchers report similar findings. For example, Bruner (1977)

 reported that requestive pointing first emerged in one infant at the age of
 13 months, and Bruner (1982) reported that gaze alternation during re-
 quests appeared in his subjects between 10 and 15 months of age. Similarly,
 in a longitudinal study of seven infants' requesting behavior, Sugarman
 (Sugarman, 1984; Sugarman-Bell, 1978) distinguished between "coordinated
 person-object orientation" and "object-oriented acts" (i.e., infant behaviors
 that were and were not intentionally communicative requests). She found that
 some infants first began to direct adults' behavior in coordinated person-
 object orientation at around 8-10 months of age but that only at 13-14
 months did a substantial number of infants' interactions with mothers in-
 clude such intentionally communicative behavior. Zinober and Martlew
 (1985) likewise found a large increase in the number of their two subjects'
 requestive gestures between 10 and 12 months.

 Since all these studies involved infants in natural interactions with their

 mothers in a fairly restricted set of circumstances, it could be argued that
 perhaps infants were not seen in all the situations necessary for observing
 their full communicative competence. Harding and Golinkoff (1979), there-
 fore, attempted to elicit vocal and gestural imperatives through the use of
 "frustration episodes." In these episodes, an attractive object was placed just
 out of reach of infants while their mothers, who had already shown infants
 that they could help obtain the object, ignored infants and pretended to read.
 Unfortunately for current purposes, results were reported, not in terms of
 age, but on the basis of infants' scores on a test of causal development. None
 of the infants at Piaget's stage 4 of causal development (mean age = 9.7
 months) showed any intentionally communicative behavior. Just over 70% of
 infants at stage 5 (mean age = 11.6 months), on the other hand, produced
 at least two vocal and/or gestural imperatives during the frustration episodes.
 Similarly, Perucchini and Camaioni (1993) also used procedures designed to
 elicit imperatives. These researchers observed infants longitudinally at 11 and
 14 months of age in two situations in which windup toys were activated for
 a few seconds by the experimenter but then left inactive. Nine of the 14 in-
 fants in this study pointed imperatively at the windup toys at 11 months, and
 all of them did so at 14 months-in apparent attempts to have the experi-
 menter restart the toy (it is unclear whether these researchers required looks
 to the experimenter's face during pointing, however).

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 19

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Declaratives

 Infants use such declarative gestures as holding up and showing objects
 and pointing to objects in order to attract adults' attention to outside entities.
 The use of these gestures would thus seem to imply that the infant under-
 stands that adults have attentional states that they may be induced to change
 by means of communicative signals of various sorts. Declarative gestures also
 suggest that infants value sharing adults' attention simply for its own sake.
 For many researchers, therefore, declarative gestures are a much clearer indi-
 cation that infants understand other persons as intentional agents than are
 imperative gestures (Camaioni, 1993; Tomasello, 1995a). It is thus interesting
 and important, in this regard, that there is very little evidence for declarative
 gestures either in nonhuman primates (G6mez et al., 1993) or in children
 with autism (Baron-Cohen, 1993).

 For most infants, showing objects and pointing to objects both emerge
 in the age period between 10 and 13 months. With regard to showing
 (i.e., holding objects up toward the adult's face, typically with a bent arm to
 distinguish the gesture from one giving or offering an object), age of onset
 is consistent across a variety of studies. Bakeman and Adamson (1986),
 Bates et al. (1979), and Ross and Lollis (1987) found some infrequent
 showing beginning at 9 months of age; Bates et al. (1975) and Bruner (1977)
 observed the first showing in their subjects at 10 months; and two-thirds
 of mothers in Bretherton et al.'s (1981) study reported that their 101/2-
 month-olds showed objects. The findings with regard to pointing are not
 quite as consistent, at least partly because even 3-month-old infants some-
 times extend their index fingers toward people and objects (Bates et al.,
 1975; Hannan, 1987), thus making indications that they are using their ges-
 ture communicatively even more important. Gaze alternation between the
 object and the adult during pointing typically is considered an indication
 that infants are checking to see whether adults are paying attention to their
 communicative signal. The first instances of points at objects that are accom-
 panied by such gaze alternation occur between 9 and 101/2 months of age
 (Bretherton et al., 1981; Lempers, 1979; Leung & Rheingold, 1981; Murphy &
 Messer, 1977).

 It should be noted that, whereas declarative showing and pointing (with

 gaze alternation) first appear at around 9-10 months of age, they do not
 occur with great frequency until 12-15 months of age (Bakeman & Adamson,
 1986; Bretherton et al., 1981; Lempers, 1979; Lempers et al., 1977; Ross &
 Lollis, 1987). In addition, there are some indications that, at these younger
 ages, infants may not yet be fully coordinating their attention to both object
 and adult, despite the presence of some form of gaze alternation (Franco &
 Butterworth, 1996). With particular regard to pointing, infants appear to pass
 through a "peculiar transitional period" at the early ages in which they point

 20

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 to the object, "swing around and point at the adult with the same gesture, and
 return to look at the object and point toward it once again" (Bates et al.,
 1975, p. 217). This calls into question the interpretation that infants' gaze
 alternation serves to determine whether the adult perceives their gesture to-
 ward the object.

 Also troubling is the finding that early declarative pointing may depend

 on the location of the object to which the infant is pointing. Zinober and
 Martlew (1985), for instance, found that gaze alternation during pointing to
 nearby objects appeared by 10 months, whereas in the case of distal objects
 it was not observed until 14 months. Likewise, in a longitudinal investigation
 of four infants' gaze alternation during pointing, Masur (1983) found that,
 whereas infants first pointed with gaze alternation at 9 months of age, they
 did not point to objects that were not in the possession of the mother until
 around 13 months of age. Finally, the temporal characteristics of the gaze
 alternation accompanying infants' points undergo change with age as well.
 At 12 months of age or younger, infants typically point to an object and then
 turn to look at the adult; at 14 months, they point and look to the adult at
 the same time; and, by 16 months, infants first look to the adult as if to see
 whether she is attending, only then pointing to the object (Desrochers et al.,
 1995; Franco & Butterworth, 1996).

 These findings of quantitative and qualitative differences in the nature

 of early declarative pointing during the age period between 10 and 16 months
 suggest that infants are only gradually learning about how gestures achieve
 their communicative goals. Thus, it may happen that infants' early non-
 communicative pointing to objects evokes responses from adults, which
 they then come to expect. If caregivers reliably provide expressions of in-
 terest and attention following infants' pointing, they may learn to expect
 these reactions and turn to the adult following pointing in anticipation of
 them (Moore & Corkum, 1994). Such behaviors as checking with the adult
 before pointing are not easily explained in this manner, however, and
 therefore very likely reflect older infants' deeper understanding of adults'
 attention per se.

 This is not to say that by 16 months infants understand all the subtleties

 involved in adult attention; they clearly do not. For example, Lempers et al.
 (1977) presented infants with a variety of objects and asked them to show
 the objects to adults. Whereas 12-month-olds did occasionally show the ob-
 jects, they most often did so without regard for the orientation of the objects
 to the adults, even after extensive prompting. For example, when asked to
 show a picture, these infants did not hold the picture vertically and right side
 up to take account of the adult's perspective. They also attempted to show
 objects to adults whose hands were covering their eyes or who had their eyes
 closed. Eighteen-month-olds sometimes presented the picture in its appro-
 priate orientation to the adult, but more often they did not. Half the 18-

 21

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 month-olds removed the adult's hands from her eyes before attempting to
 show, but none responded correctly when the adult's eyes were closed. Povi-
 nelli and Eddy (1996) found that, even after their second birthdays, many
 children will gesture to adults whose eyes are closed. The overall point is that,
 by 16 months of age, infants seem to have a good understanding that the
 adult has intentional control over her attention, but they may not have mas-
 tered such subtleties as the particular organs with which adults attend or the
 angle from which they view things.

 Only a few studies have investigated the sequencing of the emergence

 of imperative and declarative gestures, and the results are mixed. Perucchini
 and Camaioni (1993) found that imperative pointing generally preceded de-
 clarative pointing, but, because subjects were observed at only two time points
 (11 and 14 months), many displayed the two types of gestures for the first
 time at the same age (also, the experimental and coding procedures may
 have influenced these results).' Zinober and Martlew (1985) also found that,
 in general, instrumental (i.e., imperative) gestures preceded deictic (i.e., de-
 clarative) gestures in their two subjects, although, in this study, instrumental
 gestures included a wider range of gestures than those considered here and
 these researchers might also not have distinguished between imperative and
 declarative giving. When infants' points were considered separately, however,
 Zinober and Martlew found that deictic pointing preceded instrumental
 pointing. Bates et al. (1975) did not explicitly examine which type of gesture
 emerged first, although it appears that, in the Bates et al. (1979) study, declar-
 ative gestures emerged before imperative gestures.

 Language

 Most researchers place the emergence of infants' first words after the

 emergence of communicative gestures, that is, beginning around 12-13
 months on average for Western, middle-class infants (e.g., Bates et al., 1979).
 Infants' first words are often nonreferential in the sense that they serve simply
 to mark an important social event (e.g., bye-bye, thank you). Referential words
 used to make reference to external objects or activities (e.g., ball, up) usu-
 ally emerge a month or two later (Bates et al., 1979). There is very little evi-
 dence concerning whether imperative or declarative uses of referential words
 emerge earlier in development.

 2 For example, during Perucchini and Camaioni's (1993) declarative-inducing events,

 the experimenter alternated gaze between the infant and the event-e.g., moving butter-
 flies-and thus infants might have been less likely to point out the event to her than if she
 had pretended not to see it. It also appears as though gaze alternation was required for the
 infants to be given credit for declarative but not imperative points.

 22

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 Summary

 Despite variations in experimental procedure, setting, coding, and scor-

 ing criteria across studies and skills, it may be concluded that, overall, infants'
 major social-cognitive skills all emerge largely within the age period between
 9 and 15 months. Infants begin participating in episodes of joint attentional
 engagement with adults at around 9 months of age, but it is only at some
 point between 12 and 15 months that joint engagement becomes a relatively
 routine part of infant-adult interactions. Infants follow an adult's gaze and
 pointing at levels higher than would be expected by chance by 10 months of
 age, and they become capable of localizing with some accuracy the targets
 of adults' gaze and points even when several targets are present by 15 months
 of age (sometimes checking back with the adult). Although infants reproduce
 adults' behavior within minutes of birth, only at some point between 9 and
 14 months do they begin to engage in truly imitative learning of novel actions
 on objects. Infants first produce intentionally communicative imperative and
 declarative gestures and vocalizations at around 10 months of age, with signs
 of the careful monitoring of the other's attention in the months that follow
 (along with the emergence of conventional language).

 There are no studies in which the development of all these social-cogni-

 tive skills has been followed longitudinally together in the same children.
 There are, however, a few studies that have investigated more than one of
 these skills at a time. For example, several studies have investigated the re-
 lation between attention following, in the form of the comprehension of
 pointing, and attention and behavior directing, in the form of production
 of pointing. Desrochers et al. (1995), in a longitudinal study, and Lempers
 (1979), Lempers et al. (1977), and Leung and Rheingold (1981), in cross-
 sectional studies, all found that comprehension of pointing (attention follow-
 ing) tended to emerge on average slightly before production of communica-
 tive pointing, although no significant correlations were found between these
 two skills among infants. Desrochers et al. (1995) found significant correla-
 tions between each of these skills and later language.

 Bates et al. (1979) investigated several of these social-cognitive skills-
 in particular, intentionally communicative gestures, words, and imitation (al-
 though the imitation tasks that Bates et al. used consisted of vocal and ges-
 tural imitation and were thus not imitative learning tasks because they were
 familiar actions and were not directed to outside objects) -together in a sam-
 ple of 25 infants observed longitudinally four times between the ages of 91/2
 and 121/2 months. They found that infants' scores on each of the intentionally
 communicative gesture measures were highly interrelated, that infants' scores
 on these measures (especially pointing) were good predictors of language
 development, and that infants' imitation scores predicted their scores on
 both gestures and language. Bates et al. (1979) also included tests of object-

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 23

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 related skills. They found that object permanence and spatial relations in
 general were not highly correlated with communicative development or imi-
 tation. In addition, several other studies have investigated the connection be-
 tween joint engagement and early language (for reviews, see Tomasello, 1988;
 and the next section).

 In general, however, it is fair to say that very little is known about the
 interrelations among these skills within individual infants, either in terms of
 order of emergence or in terms of their possible intercorrelations. Because
 they all have been hypothesized to rest on the same underlying understand-
 ing, that is, the understanding that other people attend to things and behave
 intentionally toward them, one would expect the development of each of
 these skills to be related to the others. One hypothesis is that infants should
 be able to coordinate attention to an object and another person (i.e., show
 joint engagement) before they are able to follow into and direct others' atten-
 tion and behavior because the former requires only checking with the adult
 (looking to the face) whereas the latter skills require following or directing
 the adult's attention to some specific outside entity. The sequencing of skills
 also should depend in part on various performance factors having to do with
 the response demands on infants in particular tasks; for example, it is very
 likely easier to look where someone is looking than to reproduce others' com-
 plex actions on objects. A major goal of the current study, therefore, was to
 provide a more comprehensive look at the ontogeny of these various skills
 of early social cognition-sharing attention, following of attention and behav-
 ior, and directing of attention and behavior-and how they relate to one
 another sequentially and within infants.

 JOINT ENGAGEMENT AND EARLY LANGUAGE

 Owing mainly to the theoretical and empirical work of Bruner, a number
 of researchers interested in how young children begin to acquire language
 during the second year of life have also investigated processes of joint at-
 tention. The focus of these researchers has been almost exclusively on the
 interacting adult-child dyad and how the dyad establishes and maintains rel-
 atively extended episodes of joint engagement. The basic idea is that joint-
 engagement interactions are based on social processes more basic than lan-
 guage and that they therefore make language acquisition possible by creating
 a shared referential framework within which the child may experientially
 ground the language used by adults. Said another way, if linguistic symbols
 are social conventions that gain their communicative significance by "agree-
 ment" among users, the child can acquire active use of a linguistic conven-
 tion only if she enters into this agreement by participating in the kinds of
 social interactions (language games) that constitute that convention's com-

 24

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 municative significance. Also important to the process are the specific ways
 in which adults introduce infants to new pieces of language within these inter-
 actions that may make it either easier or more difficult for children to acquire
 their conventional uses.

 Brief History and Definition

 Bruner (1975a, 1975b, 1977, 1983) laid out a way of thinking and talking
 about language acquisition, not in terms of the structures of formal linguis-
 tics, but rather in terms of processes of communication. The basic argument
 is that there is a continuity in the process by which children communicate
 with others prelinguistically and linguistically. At the root of this commonality
 are processes of joint attention. Infants learn to comprehend new pieces of
 language by following into the adult's attentional focus as she refers to various
 entities in the immediate environment. The kinds of situations in which this
 is most likely to occur are relatively routinized interactive sequences in which
 the infant has ample opportunity to comprehend the adult's behavioral and
 communicative intentions without the aid of language itself. When infants
 learn a new piece of language in such situations, they begin to use it with the
 same communicative purposes for which they used such prelinguistic forms of
 communication as deictic and other gestures.

 Bruner's basic point about comprehension is that infants do not have
 adult-like linguistic skills to help them understand what is going on in a situa-
 tion and that they must therefore have other ways of establishing a shared
 referential framework in their social interactions. New pieces of language are
 first comprehended in these kinds of interactions precisely because their
 functional significance is redundant with some aspect of the infant's already-
 established understanding of the situation. Bruner (1981, 1983) called these
 kinds of social interactions-including everything from diaper-changing rou-
 tines to recurrent games with particular toys-formats for early language ac-
 quisition. These formats have three essential features: (a) a simple content,
 in that there are a small number of attentionally salient and simple elements
 whose interrelations may be easily understood by the infant; (b) a number
 of repetitions in the infant's experience so that she may abstract a task struc-
 ture that has a predictable sequence, with perhaps some semipredictable vari-
 ations; and (c) a clear role structure for the participants, most often reversible
 so that the infant may at first play a more passive role and then later a more
 active role. Bruner (1983) also stressed that many early formats have a playful
 affective tone as well, which not only motivates the infants but also allows
 them to "distance" themselves from the proceedings enough to consider
 their own role in the interaction. It should be noted that, although Bruner
 did not stress the fact, his theoretical position is open to the addendum that,

 25

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 if infant and adult at some point are able to establish joint attentional interac-
 tions without the routinization deemed necessary at the earliest stages of de-
 velopment, this would still provide a shared referential framework conducive
 to the learning of new linguistic forms.

 Because Bruner's account of the social interactional bases of early lan-
 guage was created to oppose the nativistic theories of language acquisition
 prevailing at the time-and so is often called the social-pragmatic approach to
 language acquisition-much of his focus was on the adult's role in structur-
 ing a situation for the child within which she could begin to enter into con-
 ventional linguistic communication, what eventually came to be called adult
 scaffolding. This constituted the essence of what Bruner (1983) referred to as
 the language-acquisition support system, or LASS, which served as a counter-
 point to Chomsky's (1968) innate language-acquisition device, or LAD. But
 it is clear from Bruner's accounts that he was also aware of the contributions
 that the child was making to these interactions as her social-cognitive skills
 of following into and directing the adult's attention gradually developed, as
 outlined in the discussion above of joint attention as social cognition.

 Joint-Engagement Episodes and Early Language

 Bruner and his colleagues initiated two lines of investigation that illus-

 trated this way of looking at early language acquisition, with some subsequent
 follow-ups by other investigators in each case. One line focused more on joint
 action in the prelinguistic period and the establishing of routines and moth-
 ers' language in them, and the other focused more on joint engagement and
 language use after the child had acquired some language skills. First, Ratner
 and Bruner (1978) tracked two infants' learning and practice of two versions
 of a hiding-finding game with their mothers from 5 to 9 months of age. In
 each case, over successive episodes the game became more routinized, but
 with some variations introduced periodically by the mother to keep the game
 lively. Over time, each infant became able to predict certain steps in the
 game, and even variations, and eventually became able to switch roles with
 the mother, actually hiding things from her. The mothers' language was also
 highly predictable, both in terms of content and in terms of timing in the
 game structure, again with some limited variations. Along these same lines,
 Bakeman and Adamson (1986) found that the vast majority of all convention-
 alized acts (mainly gestures and words) by both infants and their mothers
 were produced when they were jointly engaged with an object (both partici-
 pants focusing on the same object; Bakeman & Adamson's, 1984, passive joint
 engagement and coordinated joint engagement). Similarly, although they did
 not analyze the social interactional situations in detail, Acredolo and Good-
 wyn (1988) reported that many of children's early symbolic gestures that are

 26

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 learned via imitation seem to arise and occur in particular places in well-
 practiced social routines.

 The second line of research was initiated by Ninio and Bruner (1978),

 who tracked one child's establishment of a set of book-reading routines with
 his mother from 8 to 18 months of age. From the beginning of the study,
 there was a routinized nonlinguistic "dialogue" about the book-reading
 game between child and mother, with a clear turn-taking structure. Gradually
 over the months, the child became able to switch roles with the mother, doing
 such things as asking her to name pictures for him (pictures that previously
 she had asked him to name). Also, on many occasions, the child came to
 substitute newly learned pieces of language for the nonlinguistic gestures and
 vocalizations that had served as his turn in previous episodes, for example,
 naming a picture when previously he had pointed to it and vocalized (as the
 mother had done in previous episodes). Snow and Goldfield (1983) provided
 further support for these findings in their observations of another mother-
 infant dyad engaged in repeated episodes of a book-reading routine. Like
 Ninio and Bruner, they found that the child's language emerged most often
 in the most predictable parts of the routine interaction and, moreover, that
 at these junctures the infant often adopted precisely the language the mother
 had used in previous episodes of book reading.

 Bruner's arguments, and these empirical investigations supporting them,

 are about what is necessary for an infant to break into the world of convention-
 alized communication known as language. Tomasello and Todd (1983) took
 the argument a step further by investigating the possibility that individual
 differences in the way that mother-child dyads established and maintained
 joint-engagement interactions might be related to various aspects of the
 child's early language development. Using an adaptation of Bakeman and
 Adamson's (1984) coding scheme for joint engagement, these investigators
 observed six mother-infant dyads at monthly intervals from the infant's 12th
 to 18th month. The main finding was a very high correlation between the
 amount of time that infants spent in joint engagement with their mothers
 during the six observation periods of the study and the size of the infants'
 vocabulary at the end of the study (r = .84). Several lines of evidence, includ-
 ing cross-lagged correlations, supported the hypothesis that it was the joint-
 engagement episodes that supported the infants' acquisition of words, not
 the other way around. Along similar lines, Smith et al. (1988) also found a
 positive correlation between the amount of time that infants spent in joint
 engagement with their mothers at 15 months and their vocabulary size at 18
 months (r = .46).

 A variation on this approach was reported by Tomasello, Mannle, and
 Kruger (1986), who investigated the relation between joint engagement and
 early language in triadic interactions among mothers and their twin infants-
 who are known to be significantly delayed in early language development (for

 27

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 a review, see Tomasello, Mannle, & Barton, 1989). The reasoning was that it
 would be very difficult for an adult to establish and maintain dyadic joint-
 engagement interactions with either child in this more complex and de-
 manding interactional situation (see also Schaffer & Liddell, 1984) and that
 this might be related to the delay in language acquisition characteristic of
 twins. Using the same coding scheme as Tomasello and Todd (1983), the
 investigators observed the dyadic social interaction of 12 singleton children
 with their mothers and the triadic interactions of six twin pairs (12 children)
 with their mothers. The main finding with regard to joint engagement was
 that the twin infants spent only one-tenth of the time in dyadic joint engage-
 ment with their mothers that the singleton infants spent with their mothers
 (with the figure being closer to one-third when the triadic form of joint en-
 gagement including all three participants was included for the twins as well).
 Most important, positive correlations were found between the time spent in
 joint engagement at 15 months of age and vocabulary size at both 15 and 21
 months of age for both singletons and twins analyzed separately as well as for
 the sample as a whole (r = .73 and .74 for 15 and 21 months, respectively).
 It should be pointed out that there is one important difference-previ-
 ously alluded to-between Bruner's notion of a language-acquisition format
 and the operationalization of joint engagement used in these studies of indi-
 vidual differences. In these studies, the joint-engagement interaction may or
 may not have been a routine that the mother and infant had established over
 time. The dyads (and triads) were presented with a novel set of toys, and any
 interactions in which they came to share attention to one or more of those
 toys with others were counted as joint-engagement episodes. Presumably, in
 the months preceding these studies, mothers and their children had devel-
 oped some generalized procedures for interacting with objects and toys that
 they then applied in the experimental situation, but this was not explicitly
 investigated. The important point is that both routine interactions with partic-
 ular objects and more generic types of joint-engagement episodes that are
 established more spontaneously are both important for scaffolding the in-
 fants' early linguistic interaction and learning. The reason is that both serve
 to provide a delimited, well-defined, and socially shared referential context
 independent of language, to which any novel language may be assumed to
 refer.

 Adult Directing and Following into Infant Attention

 Nonlinguistically based episodes ofjoint engagement may play an impor-
 tant, perhaps even a necessary, role in children's early language development,
 but they are obviously not the whole story. Children also must experience
 the actual linguistic symbols that they are to learn. It turns out that joint

 28

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 attentional processes are an important aspect of this process as well, in some
 fairly specific ways.

 A consistent finding in the literature on early word learning is that
 young children who have mothers who interact with them in a directive inter-
 personal style-what Nelson (1973) called a "social-regulative style"-have
 smaller early vocabularies than other children, especially with respect to ob-
 ject names. Using a number of different operationalizations of maternal di-
 rectiveness and children's language, this negative relation has been found by
 Nelson (1973), who looked at all maternal utterances in imperative syntactic
 form; by Akhtar, Dunham, and Dunham (1991) and Della Corte, Benedict,
 and Klein (1983), who looked at all maternal utterances with a prescriptive
 pragmatic function; and even by Harris, Jones, Brookes, and Grant (1986),
 Tomasello et al. (1986), and Tomasello and Todd (1983), who all used non-
 verbal measures of maternal directiveness.

 Nelson (1981) reviewed earlier studies that had found this same negative

 relation and identified a number of different hypotheses that might explain
 it. Her preferred hypothesis was that young children are learning from their
 mothers the functional significance of language. Children who hear language
 used more for referential functions will learn many object names to serve this
 same function (so-called referential children), whereas children who hear
 language used regulatively and directively will be led to learn a few more
 general purpose terms (e.g., gimme for all objects) to regulate and direct the
 behavior of others (so-called expressive children).

 Tomasello (1988) and Tomasello and Farrar (1986a), on the other hand,
 hypothesized that the key factor in this negative relation was joint attention,
 albeit on a more micro level than in classical investigations of relatively ex-
 tended episodes of joint engagement. These investigators argued that, when
 an adult uses an unknown piece of language in an attempt to direct the young
 child's attention to something new, to comprehend the communicative sig-
 nificance of that new language the child must shift her current attention and
 attempt to determine the adult's focus. On the other hand, when the adult
 uses an unknown piece of language in an attempt to follow into the child's
 current focus of attention, the child need not switch her attention at all. In
 this case, coordination of attention between adult and child depends on the
 adult's ability to determine the child's current focus of attention, which is
 arguably more sophisticated than the child's ability to determine the adult's
 focus of attention. It should be noted that, in theory, this effect should hold
 whether or not the child is engaged in any kind of extended episode of joint
 engagement; however, it may be that, in extended episodes of joint engage-
 ment, the infant may be more aware of, or more motivated toward, the goal
 of coordinating attention with the adult.

 Support for this interpretation was provided in two studies by Tomasello

 and Farrar (1986a). In the first study, 24 children were videotaped at 15 and

 29

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 21 months of age in naturalistic interactions with their mothers. Episodes of
 joint engagement were identified using a modified version of the Bakeman
 and Adamson (1984) coding scheme, and, in a second coding pass, features
 of mothers' and children's language were transcribed and coded. It was
 found, first, that both mothers and children spoke more and carried out
 longer conversations inside than outside joint-engagement episodes. Most im-
 portant to current concerns, it was also found that mothers who followed into
 their children's already-established focus of attention as they spoke to them
 inside these joint-engagement episodes at 15 months of age had children
 with larger vocabularies at 21 months of age (r = .62). On the other hand,
 mothers who more often used their language in an attempt to direct their
 children's attention anew in these episodes had children with smaller vocabu-
 laries at 21 months (r = -.46).

 The second study attempted to provide experimental support for this

 correlational finding-which might conceivably be due to any number of fac-
 tors, including an influence of the child's language on the mother's use of
 language. An adult experimenter attempted to teach a novel word to 10 17-
 month-old children in one of two ways. In the "follow-in" condition, the
 adult used the new word to indicate an object on which the child's attention
 was already focused. In the "direct" condition, the adult used the new word
 in an attempt to direct the child's attention to an object on which she was
 not currently focused. A subsequent comprehension test found that the chil-
 dren were better at comprehending the novel word if they had experienced
 it in the follow-in condition, thus providing support for the correlational
 finding. Asking this same question, Dunham, Dunham, and Curwin (1993)
 used a larger sample of 18-month-old children and added a number of other
 control conditions and analyses. They also found that adult models that fol-
 lowed into the child's already-established attentional focus on an object facili-
 tated children's word learning relative to models that were used in an attempt
 to direct the child's attention to something new.3

 Akhtar et al. (1991) provided a very important refinement of the hypoth-

 esis that young children's word learning is facilitated when an adult uses new
 language in an attempt to follow into, rather than to direct, their attentional
 focus. In a study of naturally occurring conversations between mothers and
 their 13-month-old children, these investigators distinguished between two
 different kinds of directives in adult speech to children. That is, in a situation
 in which an adult and a child are playing with a ball, the adult might do one

 SVibbert and Bornstein (1989) and Smith et al. (1988) found positive relations between
 mothers' attempts to draw their children's attention to objects and early language, but in
 neither of these studies did investigators distinguish cases in which children were already
 focused on the object from cases in which they were not.

 30

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 of two things that could be considered directive. On the one hand, the adult
 might attempt to direct the child's attention to some new object or toy (called
 lead prescriptives, e.g., "Now let's play with the truck"). On the other hand,
 the adult might stay focused on the ball but direct the child's attention to
 some new aspect of that object (called follow prescriptives, e.g., "It has stripes").
 The former case is analogous to a change of conversational topic, whereas
 the latter is analogous to simply making a novel comment on an established
 topic.

 What Akhtar et al. found was that mothers' use of lead prescriptives at
 13 months of age was negatively related to children's productive vocabulary
 size 9 months later at 22 months of age (r = -.33), whereas mothers' use
 of follow prescriptives was positively related to vocabulary size at this same age
 (r = .78). This refinement demonstrates that the directives that are negatively
 related to children's language development are mainly those that force them
 to focus on an entirely new entity, as was the case in both the Tomasello and
 Farrar (1986a) and the Dunham et al. (1993) experimental studies. It may
 also account for the positive findings that mothers' "encouragement of at-
 tention" is sometimes positively related to children's language development
 (Ruddy & Bornstein, 1982; Tamis-LeMonda & Bornstein, 1989; Vibbert &
 Bornstein, 1989), as this may often occur within the boundaries of a shared
 topic. In all, it is clear that utterances that in some sense follow into the
 child's already-established focus of attention make the task of learning a new
 word more manageable for nascent language learners.

 It must be emphasized that, as children get older, there may be less of

 an advantage for linguistic models closely tailored to their current attention
 and interests. Indeed, in subsequent experiments on word learning, Baldwin
 (1991, 1993a, 1993b) has found that, under some circumstances, young chil-
 dren can switch their attention to the adult's focus to learn a new word from
 as young as 19 months of age (and they never assign a label to a referent
 simply because they are looking at it when the adult utters a novel label). In
 a series of studies, Tomasello and his colleagues found the same thing for
 children in the age period between 18 and 24 months (e.g., Akhtar, Carpen-
 ter, & Tomasello, 1996; Akhtar & Tomasello, 1996; Tomasello & Akhtar, 1995;
 Tomasello & Barton, 1994; for a review, see Tomasello, in press). The likely
 scenario is that children are able to follow adult attention in some limited
 situations from the beginning of language development; it is just that initially
 they are not very skilled at this when the task is to determine the precise
 referent that the adult intends when using a novel piece of language in a
 directive manner, perhaps especially in more difficult language-learning situ-
 ations (e.g., with multiple potential referents in the immediate context). As
 development proceeds, they become more skilled at following adult attention
 to novel referents in a wider variety of situations.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 31

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Summary

 There have been some questions about Bruner's hypothesis of language
 scaffolding following ethnographic reports of the way children learn language
 in other cultures (e.g., Scheffelin & Ochs, 1986). The basic observation is
 that even children who are not introduced to language in the heavily adult-
 scaffolded games and rituals characteristic of many Western middle-class fam-
 ilies-which include a large amount of speech following into children's cur-
 rent focus of interest and attention-acquire complete language competence
 nonetheless. But in none of these reports are systematic data reported in
 which the language development of very young children is quantified devel-
 opmentally. It may very well be that, whereas older children do not need
 these kinds of social interactions and language models, younger children do
 if they are going to begin acquiring language in the months immediately
 following their first birthdays. No correlational studies comparable to those
 reported above-in which adult-child joint engagement is correlated with
 children's language-have been conducted with children from these cul-
 tures.

 A central question in all this research is thus whether individual differ-

 ences in the ways that mothers and infants participate in joint engagement
 are associated with individual differences in the children's very earliest com-
 municative skills. All the correlational studies of this relation concern chil-
 dren's outcome at 18 months of age or older (and the experimental studies
 concern children 17 months of age and older). By this age, many Western,
 middle-class children have had "the naming insight" and have begun acquir-
 ing new words at a rapid rate (the vocabulary burst). The question thus re-
 mains whether joint engagement and adult linguistic models sensitive to the
 child's focus of attention are an important aspect of children's earliest com-
 municative skills in their most fragile phases near the first birthday-includ-
 ing both gestural communication and language comprehension, which have
 never been correlated with joint engagement. It is not known whether joint
 attentional interaction--both in the sense of nonlinguistic joint engage-
 ment and in the sense of adult models that follow into the infant's already-
 established attentional focus-is an important part of the process for children
 this young.

 THE CURRENT STUDY

 Although we know much more about children's early social cognition
 and joint attention than we did just a decade ago, there are still very few
 studies of any of these skills from a longitudinal point of view. More impor-
 tant, there are virtually no studies of any kind aimed at relating all these skills

 32

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 to one another, and to the subsequent emergence of language, developmen-
 tally. The goals of the current studies are thus three:

 1. to establish a developmental trajectory for each of several impor-

 tant skills of early social cognition and joint attention, especially joint
 engagement, gaze and point following, imitative learning, imperative and
 declarative gestures, and language;

 2. to investigate the developmental interrelations among these dif-

 ferent skills in early ontogeny, both in the sense of an ontogenetic se-
 quence and in the sense of the intercorrelations of these skills within
 children; and

 3. to investigate whether joint engagement and maternal language
 (i.e., language used to follow in or direct child attention) predict in a
 quantitative fashion children's very earliest skills of gestural and linguistic
 communication.

 After a description of the methods of the studies in Chapter II, we pursue
 the first two of these goals in Chapter III and the third in Chapter IV. In
 Chapter V, we conclude with a discussion of children's early skills of social
 cognition and the ways in which children use these skills to participate in the
 cultural and communicative activities into which they are born.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 33

 II. METHOD

 PARTICIPANTS

 Twenty-four mother-infant dyads participated in the study from infant
 age 9 through 15 months. There were 12 male and 12 female infants; 14 were
 firstborns, and 10 were later borns. Dyads were from middle- and upper-
 middle-class families (22 Caucasian, 2 African American) living in the Atlanta
 metropolitan area. Twenty-two of the infants were born full term, that is, no
 more than 2 weeks early. The remaining two infants were born early (one
 was born 16 days early, and the other was born 1 month early), but, according
 to their mothers, neither of these infants had any major complications at
 birth or any subsequent developmental delays. Eight of the infants attended
 day-care facilities on a full-time basis, and 16 were cared for primarily at
 home by their mothers.

 Most of the participants were recruited by telephone from the Emory
 University Psychology Department's child participants file, which consisted of
 a list of names of children whose parents had volunteered to participate in
 studies of child development in general. The remaining participants were
 recruited by letter from a nearby day-care center and a child-parent play
 group. Mothers were contacted by telephone 2-3 weeks before their infants'
 9-month birthday. Each agreed to bring her infant to the Psychology Depart-
 ment once per month from 9 to 15 months within a week of the infant's
 monthly birthday, for a total of seven visits. Parents gave written consent for
 their infant's participation. Compensation for participation included a T-
 shirt, a book, and a copy of the videotape of each session.

 All 24 dyads attended each of the seven sessions. For 15 of the 168 ses-
 sions, infants were seen slightly later than 1 week after their monthly birthday
 owing to scheduling problems (mean for these late sessions = 10.1 days after
 the birthday, range = 8-16 days). In addition, on two occasions, sessions had
 to be terminated and rescheduled owing to the fussiness of the infant. In
 both these cases, infants were seen again within a week of the terminated

 34

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 TABLE 1

 MEAN DIFFERENCE SCORE FOR NUMBER OF DAYS INFANTS WERE SEEN BEFORE (-) OR AFTER (+)

 THEIR MONTHLY BIRTHDAYS FOR EACH SESSION AND THE RANGES OF THESE SCORES

 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 MONTH

 Mean difference score .... 3.0 2.0 1.5 1.5 2.0 2.0 1.7
 Range ................ -5 to 11 -3 to 10 -5 to 8 --7 to 14 --7 to 12 --5 to 16 -6 to 10

 session. Table 1 presents the mean age difference score from the monthly
 birthday and the range of these scores for each time point.

 Mothers also were asked to return written follow-up measures (described

 below) at infant ages 18 and 24 months. Twenty mothers responded at 18
 months (11 male and 9 female children), and 15 mothers responded at 24
 months (7 male and 8 female children).

 GENERAL PROCEDURE

 Each of the seven monthly visits was conducted in a 10 X 12-foot play-

 room at the Department of Psychology, which was decorated with child-
 friendly posters and stuffed animals (see Figure 1). Sessions lasted approxi-
 mately 1 hour and were videotaped using a stationary videocamera.

 The general procedure for each session was as follows. At the beginning

 of each session, infants were videotaped for 10 minutes while playing with
 their mother and a standard set of toys. After this free-play period, two female
 experimenters (El and E2) entered the room, and El played with the infant
 for a few minutes until the infant appeared to have warmed to her. At this
 point, El began to conduct a series of structured tasks with the infant that
 lasted roughly 30-60 minutes, during which time mothers completed a vocab-
 ulary checklist (see below). The session ended with follow-up questions con-
 cerning the vocabulary checklist and the scheduling of the next month's visit.
 There were thus two main parts to each session, corresponding to each
 of the two studies (although the chronological order is reversed). For Study
 1, infants' social-cognitive skills were assessed during the structured tasks; this
 is called the experimental part of the session. For Study 2, infants' and mothers'
 skills of joint engagement, and mothers' language to infants during these
 interactions, were assessed from the initial free-play part of the session. Infor-
 mation about infants' communicative gestures and language was collected for
 this second study as well, by means of a vocabulary checklist filled out by
 mothers. Detailed observational and coding procedures and information

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 35

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 4' 6"

 9' 8"

 Target 1arget

 8' 7"

 FIGURE 1.-The testing room, with approximate measurements. All targets were between

 2 and 4 feet off the floor.

 about interobserver reliability for the measures for each of the studies are
 reported below, in turn.

 STUDY 1: STRUCTURED TESTS OF SOCIAL COGNITION

 Observational and Coding Procedures

 Following the free-play period, while mothers were completing the vo-
 cabulary checklist, El administered the series of social-cognitive tasks to the
 infant. During this part of the session, El and the infant sat on the floor
 facing each other, E2 sat on a chair behind El and coded the infant's behav-
 ior, and the mother sat on a chair near the infant filling out the vocabulary
 checklist and/or watching the session. At times, mothers were asked to sit
 on the floor with their infants to help keep them focused on the tasks. Moth-
 ers were asked not to practice the tasks with their infants at home and were
 asked to refrain from giving infants any assistance during testing. Children's

 36

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 performance on the tasks was coded live by E2 (criteria are given below), and
 videotapes were used to resolve any questions about what had happened dur-
 ing periods in which E2 was unable to code confidently for some reason (e.g.,
 blocked vision, infant's rapid behaviors).

 To deal with some of the problems of repeated measurements over
 months, some care was taken to vary the objects and props used to administer
 the tasks-but without having the objects confounded with age across chil-
 dren. Toward that end, infants were divided into three groups corresponding
 roughly to the time of their first visit (i.e., the first eight infants seen were
 in the first group, the second eight were in the second group, and the third
 eight were in the third group). There were three sets of objects or props for
 each task. A different set was used for each group of infants at a given age,
 and then each group proceeded on to the other two sets in the 2 succeeding
 months-with recycling after 3 months. For example, one group of infants
 saw one set of attention-following targets at 9, 12, and 15 months, one set at
 10 and 13 months, and one set at 11 and 14 months. The other groups saw
 different sets at those same monthly intervals. More detail about exactly which
 objects and props were varied for each test is provided in the detailed descrip-
 tions of the tasks given below. The ordering of the tasks themselves during
 any given session for a given child was determined randomly prior to that
 session, with the exception that two tests of the same general type (e.g., point
 and gaze following) were never administered consecutively. After infants had
 succeeded on a task during three consecutive monthly sessions, that task typi-
 cally was not administered during subsequent sessions (but was assumed to
 be mastered).

 The different tasks were grouped together theoretically on three hi-
 erarchical levels. The first, most specific level was that of the individual
 tasks, for example, the gaze-following task. The second was the skill level
 at which highly similar tasks were grouped (e.g., the skill of imitative learn-
 ing comprised the imitation of instrumental actions task and the imitation
 of arbitrary actions task). The third level corresponded to the groupings
 under which the literature was reviewed in the introduction: sharing atten-
 tion, following attention and behavior, and directing attention and behav-
 ior. What this meant specifically was the following. First, there was only one
 sharing-attention skill and task, and that was joint engagement. Second, the
 following-attention and -behavior skills (with their constituent tasks in paren-
 theses) were attention following (gaze-following task, point-following task)
 and imitative learning (imitation of instrumental actions task, imitation of
 arbitrary actions task). The directing-attention and -behavior skills were com-
 municative gestures (imperative task, declarative task) and referential lan-
 guage (first referential word). There was thus a total of eight social-cognitive
 tasks grouped into five skills within the three overall categories. In addition,
 infants were presented with two obstacle tasks-one involving a physical ob-

 37

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 stacle and one involving a social obstacle-to determine whether they treated
 physical and social obstacles differently. Finally, infants were also presented
 with two object-related tasks-object permanence and spatial relations-to
 see whether these tasks correlated with the social-cognitive tasks to the same
 extent that the social-cognitive tasks intercorrelated among themselves.

 The main dependent measure for all the tasks and skills in Study 1 was
 age of emergence (9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, or 15 months), that is, the age at
 which an infant was first able successfully to perform a particular task or skill
 (regardless of performance at subsequent months). Each task had its own set
 of criteria for passage, criteria that were based on previous research (see be-
 low). In all cases, criteria such as gaze alternation, correct responding to two
 sides of the room, and expectant looks were used to distinguish task behaviors
 that required social understanding from those that did not. In order for a
 skill to be scored as having emerged, at least one good observation of the
 skill was required from one or more of its constituent tasks. In a few cases,
 individual infants did not meet the criteria for emergence of a given task or
 skill during the period between 9 and 15 months. In those cases, infants were
 credited with emergence of the task or skill at 16 months.4

 Measures

 The eight social-cognitive tasks (comprising five skills) and their specific
 procedures of administration and scoring are outlined below. They are
 grouped according to their overall theoretical grouping as well as the skill
 that they are measuring. In all cases, a child was considered to have a skill
 at a given month if she passed any of the tasks measuring that skill. After the
 main social-cognitive tasks have been described, the obstacle tasks and object-
 related tasks will then be described.

 Sharing Attention

 Skill of joint engagement.-Unlike the other four social-cognitive skills,

 joint engagement is the only skill and task in the overall category of sharing
 attention. It is important to note that, to keep this task comparable to the
 others, joint engagement was measured when the child was interacting with
 the experimenters during the experimental part of the session (joint engage-

 4 This happened relatively rarely-for 92% of the infants, all the skills but referential
 language emerged during the course of the study-and results of the analyses that did not
 use this scoring procedure were similar to results of those that did. The numbers of infants
 who did not meet the criteria for emergence of each skill during the period between 9 and
 15 months are reported in Chapter III.

 38

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 ment with the mother during the free-play period will be a key measure for
 Study 2 only):

 1. Joint-engagement task.-E2 coded videotapes of this part of the ses-
 sions for infants' first instance of joint engagement with one of the two
 experimenters. Joint engagement was coded when infants looked from
 an object to the experimenter's face and back to the same object, thus
 coordinating attention to both the adult and the object. The episode
 had to last at least 3 seconds total, and episodes in which the infant's
 look to the adult's face was clearly in response to some adult behavior
 (e.g., language) were not counted. The age of emergence (AOE) of joint
 engagement was thus considered to be the age of the infant's first epi-
 sode of joint engagement with an experimenter.

 Following Attention and Behavior

 Skill of attention following.-For the attention-following tasks, four targets,
 stuffed animals, were placed around the room. Two hung from the wall on
 one side of the room, and two rested on a chair and a shelf on the other
 side of the room (see Figure 1). Sets of targets were rotated across months
 as described above, and the particular target used for each trial was random-
 ized. There were two trials for each of the tasks, one to a target on the left
 side and one to a target on the right side of the room:

 2. Gaze-following task.-El and the infant sat facing each other. The

 infant was given a relatively uninteresting toy with which to play. At some
 point when the infant was looking down at the toy, El called the infant
 by name, waited for eye contact, and then with an excited facial expres-
 sion and vocalization (a gasp) looked at the assigned target (i.e., turned
 her head to fixate the target object for a few seconds). El alternated her
 gaze between the infant's eyes and the target several times, maintaining
 the excited expression and completely turning her head each time. El
 then waited a few seconds before going on to the next task to allow for
 delayed responding.

 3. Point-following task.-The procedure for the point-following task
 was identical to that for the gaze-following task, with the addition that
 El pointed to the target with her right hand while alternating her gaze
 between the infant's eyes and the target.

 For both the gaze-following and point-following tasks, El's gazing and

 pointing continued either until infants fixated a target or, if their gaze did
 not leave El, until E2, who was watching the infant's face, determined that
 the infant had clearly seen several of El's head turns or points. Infants were
 scored as having passed a given trial if they correctly localized the target ob-

 39

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 ject (as opposed to merely looking to the correct side of the room or the
 like). In addition, E2 recorded any instances of checking (i.e., gaze alterna-
 tion on the part of the infant between the object and El's face or pointing
 hand). The AOE of gaze following was the age at which infants first passed
 both gaze-following trials; the AOE of point following was the age at which
 infants first passed both point-following trials; and the AOE of attention fol-
 lowing as a skill was the age at which infants passed either of the two tasks.

 Skill of imitative learning.-The imitation tasks used specially created
 boxes, each of which had at least two actions that could be performed on it
 and an exciting end result that occurred if the target action was performed
 (e.g., colored lights, a colorful spinning wheel, etc.). The two tasks were imita-
 tion of instrumental actions and imitation of arbitrary actions. These differed
 only in the boxes used and the actions modeled. A complete list of the mod-
 eled actions is included in the Appendix, and illustrations of the boxes are
 presented in Figure 2. For both imitative-learning tasks, children were shown
 a different action at each month. All actions were pilot tested to ensure that
 infants at each age were capable of performing them. The actions were de-
 signed to be of comparable difficulty; however, in case they were not, the
 actions were counterbalanced across ages so that each action was modeled
 for an equal number of children at each age. To keep infants' interest and
 motivation levels high, and to further minimize carryover effects, end results
 and the appearance of boxes were varied according to the schedule described
 above so that a given infant saw different-looking boxes and end results from
 month to month (with equal representation of boxes and end results at any
 given age) -recycling after each 3-month period.

 The general procedure was as follows. A box was brought out, and infants
 were encouraged to play with it alone for 1-2 minutes. If they performed
 the to-be-modeled action spontaneously, one of several alternate actions was
 substituted. El then caught the infant's attention and proceeded to model
 the target action, sharing vocally and facially in infants' excitement when the
 end result occurred. Models were repeated two more times, and then El ori-
 ented the box toward the infant, if necessary, and encouraged the infant to
 respond without naming the action (e.g., "Can you do that?"). Infants were
 given approximately 1 minute to respond. If they correctly reproduced the
 modeled action, the end result was activated. This sequence was then re-
 peated once more during a second trial, for a total of six models and two
 response periods:

 4. Imitation of instrumental action task.-Instrumental actions were
 actions on objects such as opening a hinge or compressing a spring.
 The objects for the instrumental actions (e.g., the hinge) were mounted
 on small wooden squares and attached to the top of a 30 X 30 X 16-
 centimeter wooden box. In order to reduce the likelihood of infants re-

 40

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 end result (party favor)

 spinner . spring

 Instrumental Actions Box

 end result (lights)

 action (e.g., touching head)
 was done to the top surface

 Arbitrary Actions Box

 FIGURE 2.-The imitative learning boxes. Figure is not to scale

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 41

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 producing the modeled action because there was nothing else to do on
 the box, there were two objects on each box, although only one was used
 in the model.

 5. Imitation of arbitrary action task.-Arbitrary actions included bod-

 ily movements such as patting or touching the head to the surface of a
 30 x 46 x 16-centimeter wooden box. The surface was in all cases com-
 pletely flat, with no objects attached.

 In previous studies of imitation, it has been difficult to differentiate be-

 tween mimicking and imitative learning. That is, if infants reproduced the
 behavior of the model without any understanding that it was a means to an
 end (i.e., mimicked it), they achieved the end result just the same. Imitative
 learning, as opposed to mimicking, requires that the infant reproduce the
 adult's behavior and goal, that is, for example, bend down and touch the top
 of the box with the head with the intention of activating the light. This study
 included a way of distinguishing between mimicking and imitative learning
 and thus assessing the intentional understanding of the infants. Following
 any response by infants, activation of the end result was delayed for about a
 second. Infants' attention was coded during this second to see whether they
 looked expectantly to the end result. If infants were just mimicking El (i.e.,
 reproducing the topography of the modeled action without understanding
 its goal), one would not expect them to look expectantly to the end result.
 If instead infants were engaging in imitative reproduction of a goal-directed
 action, they should look expectantly to the end result following their action.
 To be considered to have passed the current tasks, infants had to have both
 performed the appropriate action and looked expectantly to the end result.
 The AOE of the two imitative-learning tasks was thus the age at which they
 met these criteria for the task, and the AOE of the imitative-learning skill in
 general was the age at which they passed either of the two tasks.

 Directing Attention and Behavior

 Infants can attempt to direct the attention and behavior of adults in at

 least three different ways: using declarative gestures to direct attention (such
 as showing, giving, and some forms of pointing), using imperative gestures
 to direct behavior (such as reaching and pointing with whining), and lan-
 guage. We recorded any of these as they occurred during the experimen-
 tal part of the session, but we also had elicitation procedures aimed at the
 two gestural communication behaviors (varying the objects involved across
 months, as described above).

 Skill of Communicative Gestures.-As in the case of joint engagement, it is
 important to point out that, to keep these measures comparable with the

 42

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 others, only gestures used during the experimental part of the session were
 counted for this measure:

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 6. Declarative gestures task.-To elicit the production of declarative

 gestures such as showing and pointing, two situations were presented in
 which infants were likely to want to obtain the attention of the adults.
 In these situations, the infant first was given a relatively uninteresting toy
 with which to play. A few seconds after the infant started playing with
 the toy, E2 surreptitiously either (a) made a stuffed animal dance around
 in midair (by pulling it from a string using a pulley on the ceiling) or
 (b) made a puppet move around from behind a partition. Both the
 stuffed animal and the puppet moved behind El's back, in front of but
 out of reach of the infants. El, E2, and the infant's mother pretended
 not to notice.

 7. Imperative gestures task.-To elicit the production of imperatives,

 two situations were presented in which infants were likely to want some
 action by an adult. After achieving eye contact with the infant, El either
 (a) placed an attractive toy inside a transparent container and locked
 the container or (b) activated a small windup toy for several seconds. El
 then handed the locked container or the motionless windup toy to the
 infant.

 Following Perucchini and Camaioni (1993), adults first reacted to any

 infant behavior to the objects or the adult (e.g., pointing or reaching) with
 a comment and/or the name of the object (e.g., "Yes, that's Grover"). If
 behavior to the adults or the object continued, the adults responded by giving
 the object to the infant (or, in the case of the imperative-eliciting test involv-
 ing the windup toy, operating the toy). This two-step response by the adults
 was designed to help identify the communicative intent, whether declarative
 or imperative, of any infant behavior to the adults or the object. Infants' re-
 sponses were coded as imperatives, declaratives, or no response according to a
 modified version of Perucchini and Camaioni's (1993) coding scheme. Imper-
 atives were behaviors in which the infant reached for or pointed to the object
 while alternating gaze between the object and an adult's face or, in the cases
 of the locked container and windup toy, gave the object to an adult and
 looked to the adult's face. These gestures usually were accompanied by grunts
 or whines and persisted when the adult simply made a verbal comment. De-
 claratives were behaviors in which the infant pointed at, showed, or gave the
 object to an adult, alternating gaze between the object and the adult's face,
 typically vocalizing as if to comment on the object. This behavior ceased after
 the adult commented. Other responses also were recorded.

 Although particular situations were designed to elicit the different types
 of gestures, either type of gesture could potentially be scored for any of the
 eliciting situations. In addition, any spontaneous productions of intentionally

 43

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 communicative gestures during this experimental portion of the session were
 noted on code sheets by E2. These gestures were later watched on videotape
 by El and determined to be imperative or declarative, using the criteria de-
 scribed above. Most important, if infants were satisfied by the adult's atten-
 tion, the gesture was coded as declarative; if infants' gestures persisted when
 the object was not given immediately, the gesture was coded as imperative.
 Likewise, if infants' vocalizations were interested or inquisitive, the gesture
 was coded as declarative; if they were demanding or frustrated, the gesture
 was coded as imperative. Any ambiguous cases were discussed with E2 until
 a consensus was reached. In all cases, only gestures that were accompanied
 by gaze alternation between the object and the adult's face were counted as
 intentionally communicative gestures. The AOE of each individual gesture
 was the age at which infants first produced that gesture while meeting all the
 above criteria, with the AOE of the gestural communication skill the age at
 which they produced any gesture meeting the criteria.

 Skill of language.-There is only one task to characterize this skill, the
 use of referential words. To keep this measure comparable with the others,
 only language used during the experimental part of the session was counted
 for this measure:

 8. Referential language.-Any spontaneous productions of words dur-

 ing the experimental part of the session were noted. Words were then
 classified as referential (i.e., used for concrete objects or actions) or non-
 referential (i.e., function words and social words such as prepositions,
 articles, and greetings) by E2 using criteria from Nelson (1973). Only
 referential words were counted. The AOE of referential language was
 considered to be the age at which infants first produced a referential
 word during this part of the session with experimenters.

 Obstacle Tasks

 The purpose of these tasks was to assess children's reactions to physical

 and social obstacles, in particular whether they treated these different catego-
 ries of obstacles differently. Thus, if children understand something about
 human beings as intentional agents, they should do something such as look
 to the face of the experimenter when she thwarted their goal-directed action,
 whereas they should use physical means to overcome physical obstacles:

 9. Physical obstacle task.-In this task, an attractive toy was placed on

 the floor in front of the infant, and an obstacle, an open, transparent
 plastic box, was positioned upside down over the toy in such a way that
 the infant could see the toy but could not obtain it without moving the
 box. Infants were given approximately 1 minute to respond, and the test
 was repeated once later if infants did not succeed the first time. Obstacle

 44

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 removal accompanied by gaze to the goal toy was required to pass this
 test. The AOE of this task was the age at which an infant first moved the
 obstacle while focused on the toy.

 10. Social obstacle task.-This task consisted of two subtasks: the

 blocking and teasing tasks. These followed the general protocol of Phil-
 lips, Baron-Cohen, and Rutter (1992). In the blocking task, El gave the
 infant a small toy and, once the infant was engaged with it, suddenly
 covered the infant's hands with her own for 5 seconds. In the teasing
 task, El offered the infant an object, and then, as soon as the infant
 reached for it, El withdrew it and held it out of reach for 5 seconds. For
 both these tasks, the infant's direction of gaze was coded during the 5-
 second response period. Looks to El's hands during this period were
 taken to indicate a lack of differentiation between physical and social
 obstacles, whereas looks to El's face were taken to indicate a differentia-
 tion. The AOE of this task was the age at which infants looked to El's
 face in either of these frustration episodes.

 Object-Related Tasks

 Two tests of infants' object-related skills, object permanence and spatial

 relations, were administered for comparisons with the social-cognitive skills.
 The object-related skills were expected to be unrelated to the social-cognitive
 skills:

 11. Object permanence task.-A series of object permanence tests was
 taken with some modifications from Uzgiris and Hunt (1975, tests 4, 12,
 and 14). All involved hiding a small toy under one or more opaque
 screens. The procedure was as follows: El administered the easiest test
 (test 4) at the 9-month session. If the infant responded correctly (i.e.,
 removed the screen and obtained the toy) and then repeated the correct
 response in a second trial, El proceeded to the next test (test 12), and
 so on. Infants were scored as passing a given test if they found the toy
 twice (under different screens, if applicable) during a single session. If
 an infant did not pass a test during a given session, the test was termi-
 nated, and the infant was given the preceding test first during the follow-
 ing session. The AOE of object permanence was considered to be the age
 at which infants first were able to find an object following one invisible
 displacement with two screens alternated (test 12). In this test, El placed
 a small toy under one of two screens using a cup; the empty cup was
 then placed in the middle of the two screens. This test was chosen as a
 criterion because it was the most advanced test that all infants passed
 during the period between 9 and 15 months.

 12. Spatial relations task.-One of Uzgiris and Hunt's spatial rela-
 tions tasks was also administered (test 6, which utilized the relation con-
 tainer-contained). Infants were presented with a large plastic cup and

 45

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 some wooden blocks and given a few minutes to play with them. If they
 did not place at least one of the blocks in the cup during this time, El
 gave them a hint by inconspicuously putting a few blocks in the cup and
 then giving the cup back to the infants. The AOE of this skill was consid-
 ered to be the age at which infants first placed two or more blocks in the
 container and removed two or more blocks from the container without a
 hint from El.

 A Final Methodological Note

 Infants' mothers were present throughout the entire session. Infants oc-

 casionally participated in joint engagement with their mother, gestured or
 spoke to her, followed her gaze, imitated her actions, etc. Infants likewise
 occasionally followed the experimenter's gaze and imitated her actions out-
 side the attention-following and imitative-learning tests. Such behaviors to
 infants' mothers and behaviors performed outside their respective tests were
 included in final analyses for only three skills: joint engagement, communica-
 tive gestures, and referential language. The reasoning was as follows. Whereas
 joint engagement, gestures, and words took the same form and could meet
 the same criteria no matter when and to whom they were produced, possible
 instances of attention following and imitative learning that occurred outside
 the experimental tests could not meet the criteria devised for those tests (e.g.,
 no spontaneous act of imitation could meet all the criteria devised for the
 experimental tests in which the type of action, the novelty, the number of
 models, the end result, etc. were carefully controlled). This coding procedure
 enabled a comparison of all the skills on a comparable basis; that is, all mea-
 sures included all instances of a behavior during the experimental portion
 of the session that met specific sets of criteria.

 Reliability

 Infants' behavior in each of these structured tests was coded live by E2;
 this coding was supplemented by a viewing of the videotapes when necessary.
 A trained research assistant who was blind to the hypotheses of the study
 coded 34 (20%) of the sessions independently for the purpose of assessing
 reliability. The research assistant coded 27 of the sessions live from behind
 a one-way mirror and seven of the sessions from the videotapes. At least three
 sessions at each time point, and at least one session for each infant at some
 time point, were coded for reliability. All three of the 9- and 10-month and
 one of the 11-month reliability sessions were coded from videotapes; two of
 the 11-month and all the 12-15-month reliability sessions (ranging from four
 to nine sessions) were coded live. Reliability was assessed in a slightly different
 way for two measures, joint engagement and referential language. For joint

 46

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 TABLE 2

 RELIABILITY: PERCENTAGE AGREEMENT AND COHEN'S KAPPAS

 FOR EACH OF THE SOCIAL-COGNITIVE AND OBJECT-RELATED TASKS

 FROM STUDY 1

 Percentage Cohen's
 Agreement Kappa

 Attention following:

 Gaze following .................. 90 .76
 Point following ................. 97 .94

 Imitative learning:

 Instrumental actions ............. 100 1.00
 Arbitrary actions ................ 100 1.00

 Communicative gestures:

 Proximal declaratives ............ 97 .87
 Distal declaratives ............... 97 .94
 Imperatives ........... ......... 90 .77

 Obstacle tasks:

 Social obstacle .................. 98 .96
 Physcial obstacle ................ 94 .65

 Object-related tasks:

 Object permanence ........ ..... 96 .91
 Spatial relations ................. 96 .92

 engagement, reliability for identification of joint-engagement episodes had
 already been assessed for these infants during the 10-minute play periods
 with mother (see next section). Agreement between E2 and the research assis-
 tant for this coding was 97%; Cohen's kappa was .75. For referential language,
 words of any type during sessions were infrequent for most infants. When
 they occurred, El, E2, and infants' mothers discussed them and came to an
 agreement as to whether they should be counted.

 Percentage agreement for each of the other tests separately (i.e., all but

 joint engagement and referential language, and breaking down communica-
 tive gestures into their different types-see Chapter III) ranged from 90% to
 100%, with a mean percentage agreement of 96.1%. Cohen's kappas for these
 measures ranged from .65 (for the physical obstacle task; the next lowest was
 .76) to 1.00, with a mean kappa of .89. Table 2 presents the percentage agree-
 ment and Cohen's kappas for each of the measures used.

 STUDY 2: JOINT ENGAGEMENT AND COMMUNICATION

 Joint Engagement with Mother

 The skills of mother-infant dyads to engage in periods of coordinated

 joint engagement were assessed during the 10-minute free-play period at the
 beginning of each visit.

 47

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Observational Procedure

 At the beginning of each session, the mother and infant were seated on
 the floor of the playroom with one of four toy sets. Mothers were told that
 they should play with their infant "as you normally do at home" and that
 our interest was in how their infant "plays with the toys and with you." They
 were also instructed to try to keep their infant from venturing out of the
 videocamera's range. The experimenters left the mother and infant alone in
 the room to play until roughly 10-12 minutes had elapsed.

 Four similar but nonidentical sets of toys were used for these play pe-
 riods. The toys were selected for qualities that would serve to maximize infant
 and parent interest while promoting shared activities. Each set included each
 of the following types of items: bucket, shovel, blocks, ball, doll or animal,
 stacking cups, small figurines, toy with wheels, picture book, and small rolling
 objects. A given infant played successively across months with the four differ-
 ent toy sets-to avoid the boredom associated with having the same toys avail-
 able at every monthly session. There was a recycling of toy sets for a given
 child after the first 4 months (although on a few occasions infants were mis-
 takenly given a set out of its designated sequence-to no discernible effect).
 Different infants began the sequence with different toy sets so that a given
 set was not associated with any particular monthly session.

 Coding Procedure

 A primary coder coded the first 10 minutes of videotaped play periods
 second by second, beginning at the time the experimenters left the room
 and ending after a total of 600 seconds of time (10 minutes) was spent on-
 screen. As they became more mobile with age, infants spent an increasing
 amount of time off-screen over the course of the study, ranging from an aver-
 age of 1.3 seconds off-screen at 9 months to 89.1 seconds at 15 months.

 Coding procedures replicated in all important respects those used for
 the "coordinated joint engagement" category in Bakeman and Adamson's
 (1984) coding scheme. The infant's coordination of attention was evinced by
 alternation of gaze from an object to the mother's face and immediately back
 to the object. Infants also could start a joint-engagement episode with a ver-
 balization (i.e., an intelligible word) to the mother about an object (without
 necessarily looking to the mother's face). The mother's attention to a shared
 object was evinced by her touching the object, continually gazing at the ob-
 ject, and/or talking about the object. For example, an infant might push a
 car toward her mother, look up to her mother's face, and then look back to
 the car while the mother watches and comments, "You're pushing it."

 Joint-engagement episodes continued until either the infant or the

 48

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 mother shifted her attention away from the shared object for 3 or more sec-
 onds. Infants typically ended episodes by shifting their attention to a new
 object, but sometimes they would continue playing with the object for an
 extended period, during which they no longer acknowledged the mother's
 attention. Therefore, episodes were terminated if 10 seconds elapsed without
 either another look toward the mother, a communicative gesture, or an inten-
 tional vocalization directed to the mother.

 Reliability

 A second coder, who was blind to the specific hypotheses of the study,

 independently coded 28 (17%) of the play periods for joint-engagement epi-
 sodes. Four complete sessions at each of the seven time points were randomly
 selected for reliability coding to ensure that each infant was coded at least
 once but not more than twice. Overall agreement on time spent in joint en-
 gagement, as assessed on a second-by-second basis, was 97%. A Cohen's
 kappa of .75 indicated that a "good to excellent" level of agreement was
 achieved (Bakeman & Gottman, 1986).

 Gestures and Language

 For purposes of this study, which was more concerned with the quantita-

 tive aspects of communicative competence than was Study 1, measures of in-
 fants' communicative abilities were obtained via maternal report.

 Observational and Coding Procedures

 Mothers completed the MacArthur Communicative Development In-
 ventory (CDI) Infant Form (Fenson et al., 1993) at each monthly session
 (the Toddler Form was used for the follow-up procedure through the mail
 at 18 and 24 months). The CDI Infant Form consists of a written list of ges-
 tures, words, and actions that have been found to characterize the communi-
 cative skills of many English-speaking infants between 8 and 16 months of
 age. The instrument has been found to be both highly valid and reliable in
 a number of ways. Specific information on the internal and external validity
 of the CDI (both Infant and Toddler Forms) can be found in Fenson et al.
 (1993).

 The First Communicative Gestures section (pt. II, sec. A) of this form
 lists 12 intentionally communicative gestures that can be marked as used
 "not yet," "sometimes," or "often." These communicative gestures include
 point, give, wave, and so forth. The Vocabulary Checklist (pt. I, sec. D) lists
 396 words that are separated into 19 semantic categories. Each word can

 49

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 be marked "understands" for comprehension or "understands and says" for
 production or can be left blank. For comprehension of language, mothers
 were instructed to include only those words that they felt their infant would
 understand and respond to on only hearing the word (i.e., in the absence
 of other behavioral or contextual cues). For production of language, mothers
 were instructed to include only words that were used to refer to more than
 one example of a class of objects, on more than one occasion, and in more
 than one context. Thus, in the current study, mothers were instructed about
 the communicative intent, context, and use of their infant's gestures and
 comprehension and production of language to make these measures as strin-
 gent as other measures used (i.e., in all cases, we tried to select only those
 manifestations of a skill in which infants clearly understood something of the
 social significance of what they were doing). As such, the current procedures
 may have produced more conservative estimates of these measures than the
 original MacArthur procedures (see Tomasello & Mervis, 1994).

 Mothers used the same CDI booklet each month, indicating new gestures
 and words acquired. After each session, E2 wrote the month of the visit next
 to each new mark, thus providing a cumulative record of the number of ges-
 tures and words acquired each month throughout the study. Words and ges-
 tures indicated on the booklet were tallied after each session. Occasionally,
 E2 would herself mark (and initial) a word in the booklet on the basis of her
 discussions with the mother.

 In addition, another version of the MacArthur CDI, the Toddler Form,

 designed for assessing vocabulary and grammatical development of children
 aged 16-30 months, was mailed to the parents for follow-up production mea-
 sures at ages 18 and 24 months. Only the 680-word checklist for production
 was included in the mailing. Both versions of the CDI include several sections
 that were not relevant to this study (e.g., noncommunicative gestures and
 actions, understanding phrases, grammar); these sections were not analyzed.
 The Toddler Forms were sent to mothers with the same instructions concern-
 ing referential use of new words and were to be filled out within 2 weeks
 before or after their child turned 18 and 24 months of age.

 Maternal Language

 Coding Procedure

 Transcriptions were made of each mother's utterances during the 10-

 minute play periods for the 9-, 12-, and 15-month sessions only. Utterances
 were coded for their relation to the infant's focus of attention utilizing the
 same "follow" or "lead" classification of utterances used in Akhtar et al.
 (1991; see also Tomasello & Farrar, 1986a; and Tomasello & Todd, 1983).

 50

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A primary coder used videotapes and transcripts of the play sessions to
 code utterances as either following into the infant's attention (follow), lead-
 ing the infant's attention away (lead), or other, using the following definitions:

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 Follow.-Statements or commands that contained a reference to an

 object that the infant was holding and/or looking at or that were related
 to the infant's ongoing activity with an object (e.g., "Put the red block
 on top," said while the mother and infant are engaged in stacking blocks
 and the infant is holding a red block, or, "You did it!" when the infant
 places the block on the tower).

 Lead.-Statements or commands that referred to something other
 than the object of the infant's interest (e.g., while the mother and infant
 are engaged in stacking blocks and the infant is holding a red block, the
 mother directs her infant's attention to a new activity with, "Put the ball
 in the bucket," or, "Let's look at the book now").

 Other.-All other utterances that were not considered statements,
 requests, or commands (e.g., utterances used in social play ["peeka-
 boo"], conventional social expressions ["thank you"], or imitations of
 the infant's speech).

 Reliability

 To assess interobserver reliability, a second coder independently coded
 a random sample of 20% of the play period transcripts from each of the three
 age points. Overall agreement was 89%, and a mean Cohen's kappa of .83 was
 obtained, indicating an excellent level of agreement on this coding scheme.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 51

 III. RESULTS OF STUDY 1:
 STRUCTURED TESTS OF SOCIAL COGNITION

 Results are presented in two sections, corresponding to the two main
 objectives of this study. One objective of the study was to investigate the devel-
 opmental progression of each of the target social-cognitive skills individually.
 The first set of analyses thus compares the responses of infants at each age
 to each of the tasks. A second objective of the study was to explore the de-
 velopmental relations among the different skills. In the second set of analy-
 ses, we thus (a) determine the relative order of emergence of the skills and
 (b) investigate intercorrelations among individual infants' scores on each of
 the measures.

 INDIVIDUAL MEASURES

 Using criteria specified in Chapter II above, the age of emergence (AOE)

 of each task and skill was identified for each infant. Descriptive statistics and
 descriptions of developmental progressions are presented below for each of
 the social-cognitive and other tasks and skills. In addition, age effects are
 investigated for each measure that is presented in the figures, using Cochran
 Q and McNemar tests. Results of Cochran Q tests for each skill across the 7
 months were significant for all skills (p < .0001), so only results from the
 McNemar tests that identify significant differences between two ages are re-
 ported below (all significant results for sequential pairs of months are re-
 ported, but only the more interesting of the results for nonsequential pairs
 are reported).

 Joint Engagement

 All 24 infants engaged in at least one joint-engagement episode with one

 of the two experimenters at age 9 months. The mean, median, and mode
 AOE of joint-engagement episode with the experimenter were thus 9.0 months.

 52

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 S24
 D 22
 i20
 18

 16

 S14
 S12
 10-
 8

 Z 6

 9 Attention Following

 ' 4 - Point Following
 2 - Gaze Following

 0 . T I . . ..

 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 Age in Months

 FIGURE 3.-Cumulative number of infants passing attention following and its component

 tasks for each time point (* p < .05).

 Attention Following

 The attention-following skill had two tasks: gaze following and point fol-

 lowing. To eliminate the possibility of chance responding or bias toward one
 side of the room, following points and gaze twice-to targets on each side
 of the room-was required as a criterion for emergence of each of these
 skills.5 Figure 3 shows the AOE curves for attention following and for point
 following and gaze following individually.

 Gaze-Following Task

 The mean AOE of gaze follozoing to both sides of the room was 13.0

 months (SD = 2.1), the median was 13 months, and the modes were 13 and

 I A comparison was made of infants' rates of following points and gaze to targets on the

 left (the infants' right, and the side of the room slightly closer to infants and El) and the
 right sides of the room. Infants responded differently depending on the direction of El's
 points and gaze. The average age at which infants first followed El's points was earlier when
 she pointed to the left side of the room (mean AOE = 9.6 months) than when she pointed
 to the right (mean AOE = 11.6 months; t[23] = 5.3, p < .001). Similar results were obtained
 for gaze following: the average age at which infants first followed El's gaze was earlier when
 she looked to the left (mean AOE = 10.7 months) than when she looked to the right (mean
 AOE = 12.5 months; t[23] = 4.1, p < .001).

 53

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 16 months. The number of infants passing this test steadily increased until
 13 months, at which point the curve leveled off. There was a significant age
 effect between 12 and 13 months (McNemar, p < .05). Of the 18 infants who
 passed this test during the period between 9 and 15 months, 17 did so be-
 tween 10 and 13 months; individual AOEs were relatively evenly distributed
 throughout this age range.

 Point-Following Task

 The mean AOE of point following (following points to both sides of the
 room) was 11.7 months (SD = 1.8), and the median and mode were both
 11 months. The number of infants passing this test increased dramatically
 until 11 months, at which point the curve began to level off (see Figure 3).
 There was a significant increase in the number of infants passing point follow-
 ing for the first time between 10 and 11 months (McNemar, p < .01). Of the
 22 infants who followed both points in a single session, 14 did so for the first
 time at 10 or 11 months.

 The AOE of attention following as a skill was considered to be the age

 at which infants first passed either both gaze-following tests or both point-
 following tests during the same session (i.e., followed El's gaze or points to
 both sides of the room). The mean AOE of attention followingwas 11.5 months
 (SD = 1.6), and the median and mode were both 11 months.6 The distri-
 bution of individual AOEs matched almost exactly the distribution of point
 following. There was a significant age effect between 10 and 11 months
 (McNemar, p < .01) for this skill. The earliest nonsequential age effect for
 attention following (and for point and gaze following separately) was between
 9 and 11 months (McNemar, p < .05). One infant never followed either El's
 gaze or her points to both sides of the room in the same session.

 Checking (i.e., gaze alternation between the object and El's face or
 pointing hand after following her head turn or point, as if to ascertain that
 the correct target was fixated) has been taken as evidence that infants under-
 stand the purpose of adults' head turns and points. Checking in this study
 was infrequent at every age: only three obvious instances were recorded, one
 each at 13, 14, and 15 months, for different infants. This finding likely was
 a result of two factors: the obvious targets we used (as opposed to the invisible
 targets used by some other studies) and the fact that the experimenters and

 6 We also conducted an additional set of analyses in which infants were given credit for

 passing these tasks if they either localized the correct target or just looked to the correct
 side of the room. The same pattern of results was obtained using this criterion: the mean
 AOE of gaze following was 11.5 months (only one infant did not pass by 15 months), the
 mean AOE of point following was 9.9 months, and the mean AOE of attention following
 was 9.8 months.

 54

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 the infants' mothers usually reacted with praise after infants fixated the cor-
 rect target. Therefore, infants could be relatively certain that they were cor-
 rect and thus had no need to check.

 There was another indication that infants were attempting to follow into
 and share the experimenter's focus of attention, however. Eight infants (only
 one of whom was one of those who checked) pointed to the target after fol-
 lowing El's gaze to it. These infants and three others also imitated El's points
 to targets, but the fact that infants often pointed to targets following El's gaze
 (i.e., head turn alone), where there was no possibility of imitation, suggests
 that these infants knew that they were sharing a focus of attention with the
 adult. This production of pointing after gaze following began for one infant
 at 10 months, for two infants at 12 months, for four infants at 13 months,
 and for one infant at 14 months.

 Imitative Learning

 Figure 4 shows the AOE curves for imitative learning (i.e., following be-
 havior) and for imitation of instrumental actions and imitation of arbitrary
 actions individually.

 W 24
 * 22-

 20 -

 18-

 I 16
 S 14
 S12
 S10-
 8-

 6-

 01 4 Imitative Learning
 2 Arbitrary Actions

 Instrumental Actions

 0 0 ,i , , ' I

 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 Age in Months

 FIGURE 4.-Cumulative number of infants passing imitative learning and its component

 tasks for each time point (* p < .05).

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 55

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Instrumental Actions

 The mean AOE of imitation of instrumental actions was 12.3 months (SD =

 2.1), and the median and mode were both 12 months. There was a significant
 age effect between 11 and 12 months (McNemar, p < .05). No infants imi-
 tated an instrumental action at 9 months; most did so for the first time be-
 tween 10 and 13 months. Four infants did not pass imitation of instrumental
 actions during the period between 9 and 15 months.

 Arbitrary Actions

 The mean AOE of imitation of arbitrary actions was 12.9 months (SD =

 2.1), the median was 12.5 months, and the modes were 11 and 12 months.
 There were no significant age effects. One infant passed this test for the first
 time at 9 months, and one did so at 10 months; 16 infants passed this test
 between 11 and 14 months. Four infants did not pass imitation of arbitrary
 actions during the period between 9 and 15 months (only one of these infants
 also did not pass imitation of instrumental actions).

 Because it could be argued that requiring an expectant look to the end

 result following the infant's response was too strict a criterion for the AOE
 of imitative learning, analyses also were conducted using as the criterion for
 the AOE only the successful reproduction of El's model, regardless of
 whether there was an expectant look. When this more generous criterion was
 used, the mean AOE was 10.6 months (SD = 1.5) for instrumental actions
 and 12.5 months (SD = 2.1) for arbitrary actions.

 The AOE of imitative learning as a skill was considered to be the age at
 which the infant first passed one or both of the imitative learning tests using
 the stricter criterion (i.e., requiring an expectant look to the end result). The
 mean AOE of imitative learning was 11.9 months (SD = 1.8), and the median
 and mode were both 12 months. The distribution of individual AOEs for imi-
 tative learning as a general measure roughly matched the distribution of
 AOEs for imitation of instrumental actions. There was a significant age effect
 between 11 and 12 months (McNemar, p < .05). The earliest nonsequential
 age effect for imitative learning (and for imitation of instrumental and arbi-
 trary actions separately) was between 9 and 11 months (McNemar, p < .05).
 One infant never imitated either an instrumental action or an arbitrary action
 during the course of the study.

 Communicative Gestures

 Communicative gestures included shows, points, and gives. We also

 coded infants' reaches. However, it was difficult at times to distinguish be-
 tween infants' reaches and points (some infants' reaches turned into points,
 and vice versa; some infants also reached with a very slightly extended index

 56

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 24
 D 22

 20-

 18

 14

 12

 10

 8

 6

 4

 2

 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 Age in Months

 S Communicative Gestures
 - - Referential Language

 FIGURE 5.-Cumulative number of infants producing communicative gestures and refer-

 ential language for each time point (* p < .05).

 finger). For the purposes of analyses, reaches are thus encompassed by points;
 that is, points were defined as an extension of the arm toward an object,
 with or without the extension of the index finger. All gestures required gaze
 alternation between an object and the adult's face. Figure 5 shows the AOE
 curves for communicative gestures as a general measure and referential lan-
 guage.

 On average, the earliest communicative gestures to emerge were shows.

 The mean AOE of shows was 10.7 months (SD = 1.7). Twenty-three of the
 24 infants produced a show by 12 months; one infant never produced a
 show. On average, the next communicative gestures to emerge were gives, al-
 though the individual AOEs for this gesture were relatively evenly distributed
 throughout the entire period between 9 and 15 months (and one infant
 never produced a give). The mean AOE of gives was 12.1 months (SD = 2.1).
 The next communicative gestures to emerge, on average, were communica-
 tive points. The mean AOE of this gesture was 12.3 months (SD = 1.9). All
 the 21 infants who produced a point during the sessions first did so between
 10 and 14 months; three infants never produced a point.

 57

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Declarative Gestures

 Declarative gestures serve to direct others' attention. However, some de-
 clarative gestures are more complex than others. For example, when infants
 show objects to adults, they bring the objects into the adult's focus of atten-
 tion and are thus sharing with adults rather than directing their attention
 elsewhere (the same applies to declarative gives). When infants point declara-
 tively to objects, however, it is usually to direct adults to turn to look at distant
 objects. We thus will consider these two types of declarative gestures-proxi-
 mal declaratives (sharing attention with others, i.e., shows and declarative
 gives) and distal declaratives (directing others' attention, i.e., declarative
 points) -separately in some analyses.

 The mean AOE of declarative gestures as a group was 10.3 months (SD =

 1.6), and the median and mode were both 10 months. The distribution of
 AOEs for this measure roughly matched that of shows, the earliest communi-
 cative gesture to emerge, on average. The mean AOEs of each of the declara-
 tive gestures individually were as follows (the numbers of infants who never
 produced the gesture are given in parentheses): shows, 10.7 months (one
 infant); declarative gives, 13.3 months (nine infants); and declarative points,
 12.6 months (four infants). There was a significant age effect for declarative
 gestures between 9 and 10 months (McNemar, p < .01). One infant never
 produced a declarative gesture during the sessions.

 The mean AOE of proximal declarative gestures was 10.5 months (SD =
 1.6), the median was 10 months, and the mode was 9 months. There was a
 significant age effect between 9 and 10 months (McNemar, p < .05). The
 mean AOE of distal declarative gestures was 12.6 months (SD = 2.0),v and the
 median and mode were both 12 months. There was a significant age effect
 between 11 and 12 months (McNemar, p < .05). The earliest nonsequential
 age effect for declarative gestures (and for proximal and distal declarative
 gestures separately) was between 9 and 11 months (McNemar, p < .05).

 Imperative Gestures

 Imperative gestures serve to direct others' behavior and intentions. The
 mean AOE of imperative gestures was 12.7 months (SD = 1.6), and the median
 and mode were both 13 months. The mean AOEs for each of the imperative
 gestures (with the numbers of infants who never produced the gesture in
 parentheses) were as follows: imperative gives, 13.4 months (three infants);
 and imperative points, 14.0 months (nine infants). There was a significant
 age effect between 12 and 13 months (McNemar, p < .01). The earliest non-
 sequential age effect for imperative gestures was between 9 and 12 months

 7 Note that this is a full 2 months later than proximal declarative gestures.

 58

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 124
 U 22

 1 16

 S14
 S12

 8

 0Bo
 4

 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 Age in Months

 - Declarative Gesture
 -..- Imperative Gesture
 - Proximal Declarative (Show/Give)

 -0- Distal Declarative (Point)

 FIGURE 6.-Cumulative number of infants producing the different types of communica-

 tive gestures for each time point (* p < .05).

 (McNemar, p < .01). One infant never produced an imperative gesture. Fig-
 ure 6 shows the AOE curves for declarative and imperative gestures and for
 proximal and distal declarative gestures.

 The mean AOE of communicative gestures as a group, that is, the age at

 which infants first produced any communicative gesture, was 10.3 months
 (SD = 1.4). The median and mode were both 10 months. The curve for this
 measure increased sharply between 9 and 10 months, then more gradually
 between 10 and 12 months, at which point it leveled off. There was a signifi-
 cant age effect between 9 and 10 months (McNemar, p < .01). All infants
 were observed to produce at least one communicative gesture during the
 course of the study.

 Language

 The majority of the infants (17 of the 24) did not produce a referential

 word during their visits. No infant produced a referential word during the

 59

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 9-11-month sessions; two infants first did so at 12, at 13, and at 14 months;
 and one did so at 15 months (see Figure 5 above). The mean AOE of this
 skill was thus somewhat later than 15 months (when 16 months was used as
 the AOE for infants who did not produce a word during the period between
 9 and 15 months, as above, the mean AOE of referential language was 15.2
 months, SD = 1.4). There were no significant age effects between sequential
 pairs of months; the earliest nonsequential age effect for referential language
 was between 9 and 14 months (McNemar, p < .05). Seven infants who did
 not produce referential words in the laboratory were reported on the Mac-
 Arthur CDI (see Study 2) to have done so at home (one at 11 months, two
 at 12 months, one at 13 months, two at 14 months, and one at 15 months).

 Obstacle Tasks

 Social Obstacle

 The social obstacle task had two parts: blocking and teasing. In each case,
 the infant had to look to the adult's face when their play with an object was
 blocked in some way. Figure 7 shows the AOE curves for the blocking and
 teasing tasks. The mean AOE of checking the adult's face during the blocking

 214-

 20-

 14 -

 12

 10

 18

 6

 4 Block
 4-2 Tease

 -- Social Obstacle

 I

 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 Age in Months

 FIGURE 7.-Cumulative number of infants passing social obstacle and its component

 tasks for each time point (* p < .05).

 60

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 test was 12.8 months (SD = 2.2), the median was 12.5 months, and the mode
 was 12 months. There was a significant age effect between 11 and 12 months
 for this skill (McNemar, p < .05), which emerged for most of the infants
 between 11 and 14 months. Four infants never looked to the experimenter's
 face following the blocking of their hands. The mean AOE of checking the
 adult's face during the teasing test was 10.8 months (SD = 1.7), the median
 was 10 months, and the mode was 9 months. There was a significant age
 effect between 9 and 10 months for this skill (McNemar, p < .05). This
 skill emerged for just over half the infants at 9 or 10 months. All infants
 looked to the experimenter's face following the tease during at least one ses-
 sion.8 The AOE of passing the social obstacle task as a whole was 10.5 months
 (SD = 1.6), the median was 10 months, and the mode was 9 months. There
 was a significant age effect between 9 and 10 months for this skill (McNemar,
 p < .05). The earliest nonsequential age effect for the skill (and for teasing
 separately) was between 9 and 11 months (McNemar, p < .01); the earliest
 nonsequential age effect for blocking was between 9 and 12 months
 (McNemar, p < .01). All infants exhibited this skill at least once during the
 course of the study.

 Physical Obstacle

 A third obstacle task was the physical obstacle task. The mean AOE for

 the physical obstacle measure was 9.2 months (SD = 0.5), and the median and
 mode were both 9 months. There were no significant age effects for this skill.
 Twenty-one of the 24 infants passed this test at 9 months.

 Object-Related Tasks

 Two object-related tasks, spatial relations and a measure of object perma-

 nence, were included as a nonsocial comparison to the social-cognitive mea-
 sures. Figure 8 shows the AOE curves for the object-related skills.

 Object Permanence

 The mean AOE for our object permanence measure was 12.3 months

 (SD = 1.2), the median was 12 months, and the modes were 12 and 13
 months. There were significant age effects between 10 and 11 months, 11

 8 Phillips et al. (1992) made a distinction between looking to the adult's face during the

 teasing (ambiguous) and the giving (unambiguous) portions of this test. In the present study,
 infants rarely looked to the experimenter's face immediately after her give (over half the
 infants never did this at any of their visits, and the others did it only occasionally).

 61

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 24-

 22

 S 20
 18

 16

 14

 S 12

 10 *

 8

 6

 4 0
 2 Spatial Relations

 2 - Object Permanence

 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 Age in Months

 FIGURE 8.-Cumulative number of infants passing the object-related tests for each time

 point (* p < .05).

 and 12 months, and 12 and 13 months; the earliest nonsequential age effect
 was between 9 and 11 months (McNemar, p < .05). Most infants passed this
 test between 11 and 13 months.

 Spatial Relations

 The mean AOE of spatial relations was 11.8 months (SD = 1.6), the me-

 dian was 12 months, and the modes were 12 and 13 months. There were no
 significant sequential age effects; the earliest nonsequential age effect was
 between 9 and 11 months (McNemar, p < .01). Individual AOEs for this skill
 were relatively evenly distributed throughout the period between 9 and 14
 months. All infants passed this test by 14 months.

 Gender and Birth-Order Differences

 Mean AOEs for male and female infants were compared for each mea-

 sure. The mean AOEs for males and females were significantly different for
 only one measure: imitation of arbitrary actions. Females (mean AOE = 12.0
 months) passed the imitation of arbitrary actions test significantly earlier on

 62

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 average than did males (mean AOE = 13.8 months; t[22] = 2.27, p < .05).
 There were no significant differences in mean AOEs for any skills between
 first- and later-born infants.

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 DEVELOPMENTAL INTERRELATIONS

 Order of Emergence

 As can be seen in Figure 9, the five main social-cognitive skills emerged
 in the following order, on average: joint engagement (mean AOE = 9.0
 months), communicative gestures (mean AOE = 10.3 months), attention fol-
 lowing (mean AOE = 11.5 months), imitative learning (mean AOE = 11.9
 months), and referential language (after 15 months). The following set of
 analyses investigated the sequencing of emergence of the skills for individual
 infants. The order of emergence of the skills was identified for each infant,

 24

 D 22 &

 20"

 S16 , 1'

 14-

 S12
 g 10,

 8

 6 4r -

 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 Age in Months

 - Joint Engagement
 - Communicative Gestures
 """" Attention Following

 - Imitative Learning

 ---?. Referential Language

 FIGURE 9.-Cumulative number of infants passing each of the main social-cognitive skills

 for each time point (* p < .05).

 63

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 and the different patterns of emergence were counted and statistically ana-
 lyzed.

 A reliable pattern of emergence was found both for the social-cognitive
 skills and for most of the tasks within each skill. Results are presented below,
 first, for the patterns of emergence of all five of the main social-cognitive
 skills as a group. Other theoretically interesting groupings of the social-
 cognitive skills and tasks are then examined, and an analysis of the age range
 in which the skills emerged is presented.

 Order of Emergence of the Five Social-Cognitive Skills

 Individual infants' patterns of emergence for the five social-cognitive

 skills (i.e., joint engagement, attention following, imitative learning, commu-
 nicative gestures, and referential language) were determined. Because in
 many cases two or more skills emerged in the same month for individual
 infants, patterns of emergence in this analysis included skills that emerged
 before or in the same month as other skills.

 Figure 10 shows the most common pattern of emergence for the five
 main social-cognitive skills as a group, along with the number of infants who
 displayed this pattern. The pattern was joint engagement -4 communicative
 gestures -4 attention following -+ imitative learning -+ referential language.
 Fifteen (62.5%) of the 24 infants each showed this pattern. This percentage
 is significantly different from the percentage that would be expected by
 chance (2%; binomial test, p < .0001).' Figure 10 also shows the numbers of
 infants who displayed each pair, triplet, and quadruplet ordering within the
 main pattern. As mentioned above, this analysis included patterns in which
 skills emerged before or during the same month as others. Another analysis
 was performed as a check to make sure that this did not artificially inflate
 the number of infants fitting the pattern. For seven of the infants, each of
 the five major skills emerged in a different month. When the ordering analy-
 sis was conducted using the patterns of these infants only, thus restricting the
 ordering procedure to skills that came before, not before or in the same month
 as, others, a similar percentage (four of seven, or 57%) of infants showed the
 same pattern of emergence. This percentage is also different from what would
 be expected by chance (1%; binomial test p < .0001).

 In order to test statistically the scalability of this sequence of skills, a Gutt-
 man (1950) scalogram analysis was conducted on all 24 infants. This type of
 analysis tests the extent to which a particular order of emergence is reproduc-
 ible in the sample; in sequences that are highly scalable, later-emerging skills

 ' This number was calculated by dividing the number of different ways an infant could
 display this pattern given the "before or in the same month as" rule (792) by the total
 number of different patterns possible given that rule (32,768).

 64

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Joint Communicative Attention Imitative Referential
 Engagement Gestures Following Learning Language

 L15

 L 15

 1 15

 L 21

 [ 15

 1 17 I

 a

 Joint Communicative Attention Imitative Referential
 Engagement Gestures Following Learning Language

 24

 2424

 24

 S24

 L----- ---------------------

 21

 L -------- ------------------------

 I 2424
 117

 L -------------------------------

 1I2024

 124

 b

 FIGURE 10.-The most common pattern of emergence of the main social-cognitive skills,

 with the numbers of infants displaying the pattern and its component patterns. a, Fifteen
 (62.5%) of the 24 infants fit this entire pattern of emergence. Fifteen (62.5%) infants also
 fit each of the two possible ordered quadruplets within the entire pattern. Fifteen (62.5%)
 to 21 (87.5%) infants fit each of the possible ordered triplets within the entire pattern.
 b, Here, the lines beneath the pattern connect pairs of abilities (and do not include any
 abilities in the middle, unlike in Figure 10a). Seventeen (70.8%) to 24 (100%) of the infants
 fit each of the possible ordered pairs within the entire pattern.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Attention Following

 Joint Engagement-.- Communicative Gestures Referential Language

 Imitative Learning

 FIGURE 11.--Results of the ordering-theoretic-method analysis. Lines represent prereq-

 uisite relations; the directions of the arrows show the order of emergence of each pair.

 appear only in individuals who have already acquired earlier-emerging skills.10
 Infants' pass/fail scores for each of the main social-cognitive skills at the 12-
 month time point, midway between 9 and 15 months, were used; skills were
 ordered according to the number of infants passing each one at 12 months.
 This resulted in the pattern of emergence specified above. Results indicated
 that this pattern was highly scalable: the coefficient of reproducibility (Rep)
 was 0.98. Green's (1956) index of consistency, a more conservative measure
 that takes chance into account, also indicated high scalability (I = 0.73). In-
 spection of the resulting array of infants' scores indicated that, of the 24 in-
 fants, only three did not fit the pattern perfectly at this age, with the only
 difference being that all three passed imitative learning before attention fol-
 lowing. Thus, for example, if an infant had produced a referential word at
 12 months, he or she had also displayed all the other main social-cognitive
 skills by that time.

 Whereas scalogram analyses involve the entire sequence of skills, another
 type of analysis, Bart and Airasian's (1974) ordering-theoretic method, identi-
 fies prerequisite relations between pairs of skills (i.e., pairs of skills that always
 emerge in the same order). Figure 11 presents a representation of the results
 of this analysis, which also was conducted using infants' scores at the 12-
 month time point. Again, results were consistent with the same pattern of
 emergence: joint engagement -4 communicative gestures -4 attention follow-
 ing -> imitative learning -> referential language. With a tolerance level of
 zero, prerequisite relations were found between all pairs of skills except one.
 The attention-following and imitative-learning pair was the only pair found
 not to have a prerequisite relation; that is, not all infants passed attention
 following before imitative learning (or vice versa).

 The pattern joint engagement -4 communicative gestures - attention

 following -> imitative learning -> referential language was thus highly reli-

 "10 It should be noted that this analysis and the following analyses are conducted at one

 time point (12 months) and thus avoid any problems that may be associated with counting
 instances in which a skill appeared before or in the same month as (as opposed to simply
 before) another, as in the initial pattern analysis reported above.

 66

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 able, both overall and at the midway point of this age range. There were some
 infants whose overall patterns of emergence were different from this pattern,
 however. The majority of the infants who did not fit the pattern differed only
 in the ordering of attention following and imitative learning: five infants had
 the pattern joint engagement - communicative gestures -4 imitative learn-
 ing -4 attention following -4 referential language. These two patterns to-
 gether thus accounted for 20 of the 24 infants (83%). In the patterns of the
 remaining infants, only the three middle skills varied.

 The Place of Object-Related Skills

 In order to determine whether object-related skills fit into the above

 pattern of social-cognitive skills, spatial relations and the object permanence
 measure were added into the scalogram analyses. With these additions, the
 Guttman's coefficient of reproducibility (Rep) was 0.92; the more conservative
 Green's (1956) index of consistency, which takes chance into account, indi-
 cated that this group of items was not scalable (I = 0.44). The ordering-
 theoretic method also was conducted with the social-cognitive and object-
 related skills together. Results of this analysis also tended to support the in-
 dependence of the object-related skills with respect to the social-cognitive
 ones. For the most part, spatial relations and the object permanence measure
 had prerequisite relations only with the social-cognitive skills at each end of
 the social-cognitive developmental scale. Joint engagement and communica-
 tive gestures emerged before both spatial relations and the object perma-
 nence measure, and the latter two skills emerged before referential language
 for all infants, with the exception of one infant for whom the object perma-
 nence measure emerged before communicative gestures. There were no pre-
 requisite relations between spatial relations and attention following or imita-
 tive learning, or between the object permanence measure and attention
 following or imitative learning, or between spatial relations and the object
 permanence measure.

 Other Patterns of Emergence

 Patterns of emergence also appeared on the level of the individual tasks

 within the main skills. Within attention following, point following emerged
 before or in the same month as gaze following for 22 of the 24 infants (before
 for 13 infants); this ordering (i.e., point following - gaze following for 13
 infants and gaze following - point following for 2 infants) was statistically
 significant (Sign test, p < .05). Within imitative learning, imitation of instru-
 mental actions emerged before or in the same month as imitation of arbitrary
 actions for 17 infants (before for 12 infants); this ordering (i.e., imitation of

 67

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 instrumental actions -+ imitation of arbitrary actions for 12 infants and the
 reverse order for seven infants) was not statistically significant. Within com-
 municative gestures, declarative gestures emerged before or in the same
 month as imperative gestures for 23 infants (before for 21 infants); this order-
 ing (i.e., declaratives -4 imperatives for 21 infants and the reverse order for
 one infant) was statistically significant (Sign test, p < .05). Proximal declara-
 tive gestures emerged before or in the same month as distal declarative ges-
 tures for 21 infants (before for 18 infants); this ordering (i.e., proximal -4
 distal for 18 infants and the reverse order for three infants) was statistically
 significant (Sign test, p < .05).

 Patterns of emergence of other theoretically interesting combinations of
 the social-cognitive skills were also investigated. First, the physical obstacle
 task can be taken to be a measure of the infant's expression of his or her
 own intentionality in the sense of differentiating means and ends (Piaget,
 1952). We thus investigated whether infants displayed their own clearly inten-
 tional behavior, as measured by the physical obstacle task, before they showed
 some understanding of others' intentions, as measured by the social-cognitive
 tasks-as was hypothesized by Tomasello (1995a). Infants' own intentionality
 emerged before or in the same month as joint engagement for 21 of the 24
 infants, before or in the same month as communicative gestures for 23 of
 the 24 infants, and before or in the same month as all the other skills (includ-
 ing the social obstacle task) for all 24 infants.

 Second, an analysis investigating the order of emergence of the compre-
 hension and production of communicative gestures was conducted. Point fol-
 lowing was used as a measure of comprehension of communicative gestures,
 and infants' production of any communicative gesture was used as a measure
 of production of communicative gestures. Production of communicative ges-
 tures emerged before or in the same month as comprehension of communi-
 cative gestures for 21 infants (before for 16 infants); this ordering (produc-
 tion before comprehension for 16 infants and the reverse ordering for three
 infants) was statistically significant (Sign test, p < .05). When comprehension
 and production of communicative points alone were considered (i.e., infants'
 declarative or imperative points were used as a measure of production of
 communicative points), comprehension tended to precede production, al-
 though this ordering was not statistically significant: 16 infants followed the
 experimenter's points before or in the same month as they pointed them-
 selves for the first time (before for 13 infants), whereas eight children pointed
 themselves before following the experimenter's points.

 Third, the social-cognitive tasks were grouped according to their func-

 tion as indicated by the large-scale categories described previously (with some
 minor modifications). Thus, we looked at individual tasks and their AOEs
 within the three broad categories of sharing, following, and directing.
 Crossed with these was the distinction of attention versus behavior, yielding

 68

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 a 3 x 2 matrix, as seen in Figure 12. The second two broad categories are
 perfectly straightforward: they involve following into others' attention or be-
 havior and directing others' attention or behavior, as described previously.
 The first category, sharing attention, suggested two modifications in or-
 der accurately to reflect what we observed across tasks. First, the distinction
 between proximal and distal gestures seemed important. When infants held
 up objects to show them to the adults, the behavior was not really directive
 in the same sense as when they pointed to distal entities. Whereas in pointing
 to distal entities the infants directed the adult to some object outside their
 ongoing interaction, requiring the adult to change her direction of attention,
 showing objects to adults always took place within the ongoing social interac-
 tion and did not require the adult to change her direction of attention at
 all. Indeed, when infants held up objects to show them to adults, they seemed
 to expect that the adult was already looking as they did not alternate gaze
 between adult and object as they often did in distal pointing; they simply
 looked up at the adult's face and held up the object simultaneously. For these
 reasons, we decided to group proximal gestures (mostly showing) with joint
 engagement in the sharing attention category-as simply a more active ver-
 sion of sharing attention with an adult about an object with which they were
 already interacting in most cases.

 The second modification involved the social obstacle task. Like joint en-
 gagement and proximal gestures, the key infant behavior in this task was a
 look to the adult's face. It could thus be seen as a kind of "checking" on
 the adult: Someone interrupted my play, and I need to look to her face to see what is
 going on. From this perspective, joint engagement may be seen as checking
 on the adult as well: Something interesting happened with this object, and I need to
 check to see if my partner appreciates it also. In any case, for purposes of this
 exploratory analysis, we decided to regard the social obstacle task as a kind
 of "checking adult behavior" and therefore to include it under the newly
 named category sharing/checking attention and behavior (whereas joint engage-
 ment was regarded as sharing/checking adult attention because it occurred
 in the absence of overt adult behavior). This then makes for a ninth task to
 be included in this analysis (note that referential language was not used be-
 cause, from a functional point of view, it was redundant with gestures-al-
 though it could be included in Figure 12 without necessitating any changes).
 The nine tasks falling into the six categories are thus the following:

 Sharing/checking attention.-Joint engagement, proximal declarative

 gestures (shows).

 Sharing/checking behavior.-Social obstacle.
 Following attention.-Gaze following, point following.
 Following behavior-Imitation of instrumental actions, imitation of

 arbitrary actions.

 69

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Directing attention.-Distal declarative gestures (points).
 Directing behavior.-Imperative gestures.

 Figure 12 shows the time line for the emergence of these tasks using this
 grouping. An analysis using the first task to emerge in each of the three
 groups for each infant, collapsing across attention and behavior, found that
 most infants progressed from sharing to following to directing. Twenty of the
 24 infants followed this pattern (the other four infants directed for the first
 time before following for the first time). For most of the infants, this pattern
 held both for attention separately (19 infants shared attention before follow-
 ing attention and followed attention before directing it) and for behavior
 separately (13 infants checked behavior before following behavior and fol-
 lowed behavior before directing it). The pattern of attention before behavior
 held within each functional grouping as well: in general, infants shared/
 checked others' attention before their behavior, followed others' attention
 before their behavior, and directed others' attention before their behavior.

 Age of Emergence Ranges

 The preceding set of analyses described the order in which the social-

 cognitive and other skills emerged. It did not address the specific timing of
 the emergence of the skills, however. In the next set of analyses, we investi-
 gated how tightly the main social-cognitive skills clustered together in time
 by examining the periods of time in which these skills emerged. Joint engage-
 ment was excluded from these analyses because this skill had emerged for
 all infants by the beginning of the study; referential language was excluded
 because this skill had not emerged for the majority (17 of 24) of infants by
 15 months. In the first analysis, the time in which it took infants to show all
 three of the remaining social-cognitive skills (i.e., communicative gestures,
 attention following, and imitative learning) was examined by counting the
 number of months it took each infant to show all three skills in any order
 for the first time. One infant showed all three skills for the first time in the
 same month. The three skills emerged in 2 months or less for six infants
 (25%), in 3 months or less for 14 infants (58%), in 4 months or less for 19

 FIGURE 12.-Time line for sharing/checking, following, and directing other's attention
 and behavior. Ages given within the grid are mean ages. Numbers beneath the grid are the
 numbers of infants for whom the two skills or sets of skills emerged in the given order. For
 example, all 24 infants shared/checked before or in the same month as following. For 17
 infants, attention following emerged before or in the same month as imitative learning.
 Twenty of the 24 infants followed the entire pattern of sharing, then following, then direct-
 ing. (a Joint engagement -- proximal declarative gestures: 24; joint engagement -- social
 obstacle: 24; social obstacle -- proximal declarative gestures: 15.)

 70

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 bo

 C4

 U, E U~ i

 or

 0 45

 00y

 ~a

 Iz 0 ,0 r. -5 C5 t VIAt

 vE .0Z
 I~e

 0 0

 C1

 Cld

 QOOC

 Cl

 0

 Td Od

 SbOOb

 boC)

 0 r d

 0snL

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 infants (79%), in 5 months or less for 21 infants (88%), and in 6 months or
 less for 23 infants (96%).

 The second analysis investigated the actual age, as opposed to the time
 period, by which all three of these skills first emerged (in effect, this analysis
 includes four skills, as joint engagement emerged by 9 months for all infants).
 All these skills emerged by age 10 months for two infants (8%), by 11 months
 for 8 infants (33%), by 12 months for 14 infants (58%), by 13 months for
 18 infants (75%), by 14 months for 20 infants (83%), and by 15 months for
 22 infants (92%).

 Summary

 There was a common pattern of emergence for the five main social-cog-
 nitive skills. Almost two-thirds of the infants followed the same pattern of
 emergence: joint engagement -- communicative gestures -- attention follow-
 ing -4 imitative learning -4 referential language. Most of the infants who did
 not fit this pattern differed only in the ordering of attention following and
 imitative learning (for a total of 20 of 24 infants). For over half the infants,
 the three middle skills (communicative gestures, attention following, and imi-
 tative learning) emerged in 3 months or less; for almost 80% of the infants,
 they emerged in 4 months or less. Nonsocial, object-related skills (i.e., spatial
 relations and the object permanence measure) did not fit into the above
 pattern, instead emerging relatively inconsistently with respect to the social-
 cognitive skills. Most infants progressed from sharing/checking others' atten-
 tion and then behavior, to following into others' attention and then behavior,
 to directing others' attention and then behavior.

 Correlations

 In order to investigate the relations among the skills further, the AOEs
 of each skill were correlated using Pearson product-moment correlations
 (one tailed since we predicted positive correlations) to determine whether
 infants who demonstrated one skill earlier also performed others earlier.
 Cross-lagged correlation analyses using infants' scores (i.e., pass or fail) on
 each of the skills at each age were also conducted.

 AOE Correlations

 Correlations among the main social-cognitive skills are listed in Table 3
 (joint engagement could not be correlated with the other skills because it
 had emerged for all infants by 9 months, at the beginning of the study). The
 AOE of communicative gestures was significantly positively correlated with

 72

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 CORRELATIONS MATRIX FOR THE MAIN SOCIAL-COGNITIVE SKILLS

 TABLE 3

 Communicative Attention Imitative Referential
 Gestures Following Learning Language

 Communicative gestures ..... -.. .46* .30a .46*
 Attention following .......... ... .33b .36*
 Imitative learning ........... ? .31c
 Referential language.........

 NOTE.-Joint engagement could not be correlated with the other skills because it had emerged for all infants by 9

 months.

 "p < .08, but the correlation between imitative learning and distal declarative gestures was significant (r = .43, p <

 .05).

 bp < .06, but the correlation between imitative learning and point following was significant (r = .38, p < .05).
 cp < .08, but the correlation between referential language and imitation of arbitrary actions was significant (r = .39,

 p < .05).

 * p < .05.

 both the AOE of attention following (r = .46) and the AOE of referential
 language (r = .46), and attention following was significantly positively corre-
 lated with referential language (r = .36, p < .05). The remaining three corre-
 lations approached significance. When the main social-cognitive skills were
 broken down into their component tasks, however, for each pair of skills sig-
 nificant correlations were found between one of the skills and a component
 of the other skill. That is, whereas the correlation between imitative learning
 and communicative gestures only approached significance (r = .30, p < .08),
 the correlation between imitative learning and distal declarative gestures was
 significant (r = .43, p < .05). Likewise, the correlation between imitative
 learning and attention following only approached significance (r = .33, p <
 .06), but there was a significant correlation between imitative learning and
 point following (r = .38, p < .05). The correlation between imitative learning
 and referential language also only approached significance (r = .31, p < .08),
 but there was a significant correlation between imitation of arbitrary actions
 and referential language (r = .39, p < .05).

 To examine whether the significant correlations were due to the two

 skills in each pair emerging at the same age or emerging at different ages in
 a predictable order, paired, two-tailed t tests were conducted for each of the
 main social-cognitive skill correlations. For most pairs of skills, significant dif-
 ferences (all at the level of p < .001) were found between the AOEs of each
 skill: communicative gestures and attention following (t[23] = 3.80); commu-
 nicative gestures and referential language (t[23] = 16.65); attention follow-
 ing and referential language (t[23] = 10.97); imitative learning and commu-
 nicative gestures (t[23] = 4.13); and imitative learning and referential
 language (t[23] = 8.58, all p's < .001). These pairs of skills thus emerged at
 different ages in a predictable order. There was no significant difference be-
 tween the AOEs of imitative learning and attention following, on the other

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 73

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 TABLE 4

 CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE OBJECT-RELATED AND THE

 SOCIAL-COGNITIVE SKILLS

 Spatial Object
 Relations Permanence

 Communicative gestures ............... .41* .09
 Attention following ................... .13 .15
 Imitative learning ..................... .46* .44*
 Referential language .................. .32 .28

 * p< .05.

 hand (t[23] = 1.05, p > .30), or between the AOEs of imitative learning and
 point following (t[23] = 0.41, p > .68). This finding is consistent with the
 ordering and mean AOE results presented above, which indicated that these
 skills emerged at the same age.

 There were some significant correlations between object-related and so-

 cial-cognitive skills (see Table 4). Spatial relations was significantly positively
 correlated with communicative gestures (r = .41), and both spatial relations
 (r = .46) and the object permanence measure (r = .44) were correlated with
 imitative learning of actions on objects. The two object-related skills, spatial
 relations and the object permanence measure, were also correlated with each
 other (r = .37, p < .05).

 AOE correlations were also investigated at the different levels used in
 the ordering analyses. First, correlations between various components of the
 main social-cognitive skills were examined. Within attention following, gaze
 following and point following were not significantly correlated (r = .22, p =
 .15). Within imitative learning, imitation of instrumental actions and imita-
 tion of arbitrary actions were significantly positively correlated (r = .58, p <
 .001). Within communicative gestures, the AOE of infants' first declarative
 gesture was significantly correlated with the AOE of their first imperative ges-
 ture (r = .44, p < .05), and the correlation between proximal and distal de-
 clarative gestures (r = .30) approached significance (p < .08). Of all the
 different types of communicative gestures, only proximal declarative gestures
 were significantly correlated with referential language (r = .40, p < .05). In
 addition, the correlation between comprehension and production of commu-
 nicative gestures, that is, the correlation between point following and produc-
 tion of any communicative gesture, was significant (r = .43, p < .05).

 Cross-Lagged Correlations

 Figure 13 shows representations of results of the cross-lagged correlation
 analyses for selected pairs of the main social-cognitive skills. Phi correlations

 74

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Communicative Gestures
 9 10 11 12 13 14 IS

 A o 1 00

 9 10 11 12 13 14 1is
 Attention Following

 Communicative Gestures
 9 10 11 12 13 14 15*

 .61

 .63

 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 Referential Language

 Attention Following
 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 .52

 .69

 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 Referential Language

 Imitative Learning
 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 d.69

 .52

 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 Referential Language

 FIGURE 13.-Cross-lagged correlations for the selected social-cognitive skills at each

 month. Lines represent significant correlations between months (p < .005). (* All infants
 had produced a communicative gesture by 15 months, so no correlations are given for this
 month.)

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 were used on infants' pass/fail scores at each month; because of the large
 number of correlations, a significance level of .005 was used. All significant
 correlations were positive. There were significant correlations between several
 pairs of different skills. For instance, communicative gestures at 12, 13, and
 14 months were correlated with attention following at 13, 14, and 15 months
 in both directions (e.g., communicative gestures at 13 months were corre-
 lated with attention following at 14 months, and attention following at 13
 months was correlated with communicative gestures at 14 months; see Figure
 13a). Early communicative gestures, attention following, and imitative learn-
 ing were all correlated with referential language at later months (see Figure
 13b-d). There were no significant correlations between communicative ges-
 tures and imitative learning or between attention following and imitative
 learning at individual months.

 Summary

 There were several significant correlations between the AOEs of the

 main social-cognitive skills: attention following, communicative gestures, and
 referential language were all intercorrelated. There were also several signifi-
 cant correlations between individual tasks and abilities at the skill level, with
 the AOEs of all pairs of the social-cognitive skills or their components being
 interrelated. A few correlations were found between the object-related skills
 and some of the social-cognitive skills. Finally, cross-lagged correlations
 showed that infants' pass/fail scores on the social-cognitive skills at individual
 sessions were also often intercorrelated.

 DISCUSSION

 The age of emergence and developmental progression of the individual
 measures of this study were overall very similar to those found in other studies
 in which similar measurement procedures were used. Thus, all 24 infants in
 the study were observed to engage in at least one brief episode of joint en-
 gagement with an adult at 9 months of age, which accords with the original
 age posited by Trevarthen and Hubley (1978). Although Bakeman and Adam-
 son (1984) found that fewer than half their 9-month-olds engaged in coordi-
 nated joint attention, their time sample was only 10 minutes, whereas ours,
 for purposes of this measure, was approximately 1 hour. We also found that
 most of the infants checked the adult's face when something in an inter-
 action went wrong (during the blocking and teasing tasks) between 10 and
 11 months of age, in general accordance with Phillips et al. (1992), who
 found that basically all their 9-18-month-olds behaved in this way. Infants

 76

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 in our study thus shared or checked adults' attention or behavior in one of
 these two ways, mostly both, by 9 months of age.

 With regard to following attention, previous research has found that, al-

 though infants follow the gaze of others in a general way between 8 and 10
 months of age (Scaife & Bruner, 1975), it is not until 12-15 months of age
 that they are able to localize specific targets (Butterworth & Cochran, 1980;
 Butterworth & Jarrett, 1991). Our findings of an average age of emergence
 of 13 months for gaze following accords with this previous research. Our
 findings that infants' ability to follow pointing gestures to targets emerged
 roughly 1 month earlier is also in accord with previous research (e.g., Butter-
 worth & Grover, 1988, 1990). In our sample, infants passed one or the other
 of these attention-following tasks, on average, at 11.5 months of age. With
 regard to following behavior, Meltzoff (1988a, 1988b) established a develop-
 mental window for imitative learning of actions on objects-ruling out sim-
 pler forms of social learning such as stimulus enhancement and emulation
 learning-at 9-14 months of age. Our finding that infants engaged in imita-
 tive learning of both instrumental and arbitrary acts mostly between 12 and
 13 months of age fits comfortably within this window. Somewhat surprisingly,
 we did not find a statistically significant advantage for the imitative learning
 of instrumental over arbitrary acts. In our sample, infants passed one or the
 other of these imitative learning tasks, on average, at 11.9 months of age.

 Communicative gestures are not a homogeneous set, and thus we found

 that showing objects emerged on average between 10 and 11 months, whereas
 pointing-for either imperative or declarative purposes-emerged between
 12 and 13 months. These ages are in general accord with previous research
 (e.g., Bates et al., 1979; Bretherton et al., 1981). We found no evidence of
 imperatives before declaratives (as reported by, e.g., Perucchini & Camaioni,
 1993), and this is therefore an issue for future research. Indeed, we found
 that, on average, infants produced proximal declaratives (mostly shows) be-
 fore imperatives and that they produced declarative points before imperative
 points. The average age at which infants in our study first produced a clearly
 communicative gesture of one of these types (usually shows) was 10.3 months.
 In terms of language production during the session, our sample was a bit late
 relative to many samples, with an average age of emergence of sometime after
 15 months of age. This is likely due to our relatively strict definition of lan-
 guage production as requiring the flexible use of referential words.

 Our findings thus strongly support the generally held view that the pe-
 riod from 9 to 12 months of age represents a crucially important age in the
 emergence of infants' skills of social cognition. Over half our infants dis-
 played all the main social-cognitive skills that we measured, with the excep-
 tion of production of referential language, by 12 months of age. It is note-
 worthy that these results were obtained even though for each and every task
 we required certain key accompaniments to the infants' behavior (e.g., gaze

 77

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 alternation, expectant looks, following gaze to both sides) that seemed to
 indicate more than just a behavior learned by rote, that is, accompaniments
 that seemed to require the infant to take account of the adult's intentions
 or attention. Although the validity of any one of the tasks could be criticized,
 and thus its age of emergence called into question, it is hard to imagine that
 all the tasks have fatal flaws-which would have to be of a different nature
 for different tasks-allowing them to be passed in ways that do not require
 the understanding of others as intentional agents. We will return to this point
 in Chapter V below. We thus believe that the current results provide very
 strong support for the hypothesis that 9-12 months is the critical age period,
 at least for American, middle-class infants, in the emergence of their initial
 skills in understanding the intentions and attention of other persons.

 The most novel and interesting findings of the current study concerned
 the developmental interrelations among these various measures of early social
 cognition and communication. The most common order of emergence of
 the five major social-cognitive and communicative skills measured was joint
 engagement - communicative gestures - attention following - imitative
 learning - referential language. This was true for the group on average and
 on the level of individual infants as well, as almost two-thirds of the infants
 followed this exact pattern of emergence. When attention following and imi-
 tative learning are allowed to alternate (given that they both involve following
 into the attention/behavior of others), 20 of the 24 infants followed the pat-
 tern. These quantitative patterns are somewhat generous in that they count
 "ties" among the age of emergence as consistent with the pattern, but
 more rigorous statistical analyses (scalogram and order-theoretic analyses)
 confirmed that these patterns were indeed strongly characteristic of the
 sample.

 When we descend to the task level, we still find very consistent ordering

 patterns. Given our bifurcation of the declarative gestures into proximal de-
 claratives (mostly shows), which emerged very early, and distal declaratives
 (mostly points), which emerged two months later, and our interpretation of
 the social obstacle task as a task of checking adult behavior, a very interesting
 pattern emerged. Twenty of 24 infants engaged in sharing/checking atten-
 tion and behavior, then following into attention and behavior, then directing
 attention and behavior. That is, during the period between 9 and 11 months,
 infants looked up to adults in periods of joint engagement, looked up to
 them in the social obstacle task, and looked up to them as they also held
 objects up for them to see. During the period between 11 and 12 months,
 they actively followed the trajectory of the adults' pointing and gazing, and
 they followed into the adults' behavior on objects by imitating it (with an
 expectation that it would lead to the same goal). Finally, during the period
 between 12 and 13 months, infants began attempting to redirect the adult's
 attention to some specific location outside the local space around them and

 78

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 to request various adult behavior imperatively, using distal gestures such as
 pointing (and, somewhat later, referential words).

 This ordering of skills and tasks held even though the task demands in-

 volved across tasks were made to be as comparable as possible, both in the
 sense of information-processing demands and in the sense that we required
 in each case some indication that the infant understood something of the
 adult's intentions or attention in the task. Somewhat different measurement
 operations were used for different skills as we attempted to adapt to their
 different natures (e.g., some skills were measured throughout the session,
 whereas others could be displayed only in their structured tasks). However,
 skills that were measured throughout the session did not all emerge earlier
 than those measured in the structured tasks (i.e., referential language
 emerged last), and reliable orderings were found for skills and tasks that were
 measured in the same ways (e.g., joint engagement emerged before commu-
 nicative gestures, point following emerged before gaze following, and individ-
 ual communicative gestures emerged in a predictable order).

 In addition, our results for the individual skills accorded quite well with
 the findings of other studies, which sometimes used different measurement
 operations (see above), and thus this is not a likely explanation for the order-
 ing pattern that we observed. Nor would motoric difficulty seem to be an
 adequate explanation for the observed order of emergence. For example,
 motorically speaking, gestures would seem to be more difficult than attention
 following (simply turning the head), yet communicative gestures emerged
 before attention following for all but three of the 24 infants. Indeed, when
 expectant looks to the end result were not required as criteria for passing an
 imitative learning test, even imitative learning, clearly the most motorically
 challenging of the tasks, emerged on average before attention following and
 only slightly after communicative gestures. It is also noteworthy that the two
 object-related skills measured-object permanence and spatial relations-
 did not fit into this sequence in a consistent way across infants, providing
 some indication that all these skills are interrelated in ways that go beyond
 general maturational timetables applying to all ontogenetic sequences
 equally. In all, to our knowledge, the current study provides the most explicit
 and detailed account available to date of the developmental ordering in-
 volved in these different social-cognitive skills. Its theoretical significance will
 be discussed in Chapter V below.

 Also of importance are the correlations among the tasks. All the social-

 cognitive and communicative skills intercorrelated positively, although in
 some cases only at moderate levels and only when individual tasks were
 considered. Significant positive correlations were found between the ages
 of emergence of each pair of the main social-cognitive skills or one of
 their constituent tasks (with the exception of joint engagement, which had
 emerged for all infants by 9 months, at the beginning of the study). It is

 79

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 perhaps of special interest that we found a correlation between the ages of
 emergence of imitative learning and distal declarative gestures (not proximal
 gestures), which makes sense because distal declarative gestures (i.e., points)
 are conventional and thus probably are learned or at least refined through
 imitation-which is probably not true of proximal gestures such as shows.
 Also, the correlation between the ages of emergence of referential language
 and imitation of arbitrary actions (but not imitation of instrumental actions)
 makes sense because, in order to learn to use referential words, infants must
 be able to imitate sounds only arbitrarily connected to their referents. Finally,
 the correlation between imitative learning and point following (but not gaze
 following) makes sense because both imitative learning and point follow-
 ing involve infants following the other's intention that they do something,
 whereas with gaze following, at least in infants' natural environments, this
 intention is less obvious. There were also several significant cross-lagged cor-
 relations between different skills at different ages, mostly involving one or
 another of the social-cognitive skills (especially communicative gestures, at-
 tention following, and imitative learning) predicting the age of emergence
 of referential language. Contrary to our expectation, there was no correlation
 between the emergence of point following and gaze following.

 In truth, we expected that there would be higher correlations than there
 were among these various skills, on the basis of the hypothesis that they are
 all manifestations of infants' emerging understanding of others as inten-
 tional agents (Tomasello, 1995a). However, the problem was that these skills
 emerged in such a rapid manner for most infants (for almost 60% of the
 infants in 3 months or less and for almost 80% of the infants in 4 months
 or less) that there was very little variability for the correlations to work with.
 Obviously, a more finely grained approach-for example, sampling infants'
 behavior every week-would be required to establish correlations that ac-
 counted for large portions of the variance in skills that emerged in such close
 developmental synchrony. Overall, then, given that our measurement interval
 was 1 full month, and given that infants acquired the skills in relatively rapid
 succession, with the result that there was relatively little variability in ages of
 emergence, it is in some ways amazing that we obtained the correlations that
 we did.

 The fact that each of our two object-related tasks (the object perma-

 nence measure and spatial relations) was positively correlated with imitative
 learning, and that spatial relations was positively correlated with communica-
 tive gestures, should temper our interpretation of these correlational findings
 in terms of a single underlying social-cognitive skill. It may be of interest to
 note that the social-cognitive skills involved in these correlations also involve
 objects: imitative learning involved manipulating the physical apparatus, and
 the age of emergence of communicative gestures was due almost totally to
 shows, which involved holding up objects to adults. This might suggest that

 80

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 object manipulation is an important factor in the social-cognitive skills that
 correlated with the object-related skills. And, of course, it opens the possibil-
 ity that underlying all the skills that we measured is the maturing of some
 very general information-processing ability or the like. Again, the theoretical
 implications of these correlational findings will be discussed in Chapter V
 below.

 We have made some fairly broad claims about the skills that we investi-

 gated in this study, but of course we, as most other investigators, used West-
 ern, middle-class infants as participants. It is not known whether the ordering
 patterns and interrelations that we have found would hold for infants raised
 in other cultural environments. In addition, it is important to note that the
 social-cognitive skills measured in this study are almost uniformly impaired
 in children with autism, whereas object-related skills are spared in these chil-
 dren. Similarly, our nearest primate relatives, the apes, also seem to have
 more human-like skills in the domain of object manipulation and knowledge
 than in the social-cognitive domain. These populations may therefore pro-
 vide further evidence for some internal consistency among the most basic
 social-cognitive skills, along with a distinction between these skills and the
 object-related skills.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 81

 IV. RESULTS OF STUDY 2:
 JOINT ENGAGEMENT AND COMMUNICATION

 The main objective of Study 1 was to document the order of emergence
 and interrelations of a number of infant skills of social cognition expressed
 essentially individually. The main objective of Study 2 was to investigate in-
 fants' skills of social interaction with their mothers, in the form of relatively
 extended periods of joint attentional engagement, and how these skills relate
 to the emergence of infants' communicative skills. Whereas, in Study 1, the
 age of emergence was the outcome of interest for all infant skills, in Study
 2, a more quantitative approach was taken-relating such things as the
 amount of time infants spent in joint engagement with their mothers and
 the actual number of words in their vocabularies. Also of interest were the
 way in which mothers used language in these interactions (either to follow
 into or to redirect their child's attention) and the ways in which this related
 to children's early vocabularies. The main feature distinguishing the current
 study from other studies investigating these same relations is the focus on
 very young children just beginning to communicate in conventional ways. We
 were able to study children this young by focusing on preverbal gestures and
 language comprehension as measures of their communicative competence
 (whereas other studies have focused on language production, which emerges
 only some months later).

 Results are presented in two sections. In the first section, we focus on
 the development of mother-infant joint attentional engagement, maternal
 language, and communicative skills as individual measures. In the second sec-
 tion, we explore the various interrelations among these three sets of interac-
 tive phenomena.

 INDIVIDUAL MEASURES

 Each of the main variables-joint attentional engagement, communica-
 tion, and maternal language-are described below. Means and standard er-

 82

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 rors of the mean are presented in the figures. Where applicable, age effects
 were tested with repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). When age
 effects were significant, they were tested for significant linear, quadratic, and
 cubic trends in order to evaluate the form of the effects. In order to obtain
 a greater understanding of the developmental patterns, significant age effects
 were examined with Helmhert comparisons (Abacus Concepts, 1989). This
 test compares the mean of an individual time point to the weighted mean of
 the remaining time points at older ages.

 Joint Engagement

 Recall that, for this study, the joint-engagement measures were obtained

 from the 10-minute free-play period at the beginning of infants' visits and
 measured infants' abilities to engage in relatively extended periods of joint
 engagement with their mothers. It is important to note that, in the previous
 major longitudinal study of this phenomenon, Bakeman and Adamson
 (1984) observed children only at 3-month intervals (6, 9, 12, 15, and 18
 months). The current descriptive information will therefore serve to fill in
 the monthly gaps in that analysis.

 Time in Joint Engagement

 In the current sample of infants, the average time that mother-infant

 dyads spent in joint engagement gradually increased each month, rising from
 an average of 13 seconds (range 0-56, SD = 16.3) at 9 months to an average
 of 44 seconds (range 0-123, SD = 35.7) at 15 months. The dyads thus spent
 significantly more time in joint engagement with age (F[6, 23] = 4.71, p <
 .001). Figure 14 illustrates this increase in mean time in joint engagement
 and its significant linear trend (F[1, 23] = 26.8, p < .001). This age effect
 resulted mostly from the increase in joint-engagement time between 9 and
 12 months (Helmhert comparison at 9 months, F[1, 23] = 11.17, p < .01;
 at 10 months, F[1, 23] = 8.84, p < .01; and at 11 months, F[1, 23] = 4.59,
 p < .05). Between 12 and 15 months, joint-engagement time stabilized, show-
 ing no significant increases on a monthly basis.

 Number of Joint-Engagement Episodes

 The number ofjoint-engagement episodes also increased with age (F[6,
 23] = 4.06, p < .001), from an average of 1.6 episodes (range 0-8, SD =
 2.1) at 9 months to 4.3 episodes (range 0-13, SD = 3.2) at 15 months. Figure
 15 illustrates this increase and the significant linear trend to this age effect
 (F[6, 23] = 20.5, p < .001). Like joint-engagement time, the frequency of

 83

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 60-

 55-

 50

 e: 45
 S - 40

 o- 35
 30

 1 25

 S20

 " 10-

 5

 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

 Age in Months

 FIGURE 14.-Mean time spent in joint engagement in seconds at each time point (vertical

 lines are standard errors of the mean) (* p < .05).

 6-

 5-

 ,H4

 "C":

 41 I

 0 II1

 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

 Age in Months

 FIGURE 15.-Mean number of joint-engagement episodes at each time point (vertical

 lines are standard errors of the mean) (* p < .05).

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 II

 10-

 = 9-
 8o

 7-,

 6

 5-

 4

 q 3

 .o_ 2

 0 '' ! i

 8 9 10 Il 12 13 14 15 16

 Age in Months

 FIGURE 16.-Average duration of joint-engagement episodes in seconds at each time

 point (vertical lines are standard errors of the mean) (* p < .05).

 episodes increased significantly between month 9 and month 12 (Helmhert
 comparison at 9 months, F[1, 23] = 9.56, p < .01; at 10 months, F[1, 23] =
 9.39, p < .01; at 11 months, F[1, 23] = 4.36, p < .05) and leveled off between
 12 and 15 months.

 Durations of Joint-Engagement Episodes

 The average duration of joint-engagement episodes also increased sig-
 nificantly with age (F[6, 23] = 2.24, p < .05), with a mean duration at 9
 months of 4.89 seconds (range 0-17, SD = 4.8) and a mean duration at 15
 months of 9.17 seconds (range 0-20.5, SD = 5.6). Figure 16 illustrates the
 significant linear trend (F[1, 23] = 10.06, p < .01). However, further compar-
 isons revealed that this effect resulted mainly from a large increase in episode
 duration between 9 and 10 months (Helmhert comparison at 9 months, F[1,
 23] = 8.14, p < .01). After this initial increase, mean durations were similar
 from 10 through 15 months, ranging between 6.7 and 9.2 seconds.

 Individual Patterns of Joint Engagement

 All these measures of joint attentional engagement reflect mean values
 for the entire group of 24 infants. However, there were large individual differ-
 ences among mother-infant dyads in these measures at any given month as

 85

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 100

 90-

 80-

 S70-

 S 40-

 S40 *".-:-.Ne..

 20 - Early

 Age in MonthsMiddle

 10

 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

 Age in Months

 FIGURE 17.-Mean joint-engagement time of the early, middle, late, and never joint-

 engagement groups.

 well as large intraindividual differences within dyads across months. We thus
 felt it necessary to look more closely at ontogenetic patterns of joint atten-
 tional engagement to see whether there were some identifiable profiles into
 which dyads could be grouped.

 To this end, we plotted separately each dyad's time in joint engagement

 across months. The dyads fell quite naturally into four groups: early, middle,
 late, and never (see Figure 17). The six dyads in the early group began the
 study at 9 or 10 months with significant amounts of joint engagement (opera-
 tionalized as approximately 30 seconds or more in one session-established
 post hoc in a way that maximally discriminated groups) and then increased
 to and maintained high levels of joint engagement (between 40 and 70 sec-
 onds) across the remaining months. The five dyads in the middle group be-
 gan spending significant amounts of time in joint engagement at 11 or 12
 months (with very little during months 9 and 10), and a high level was main-
 tained throughout the rest of the study. The seven dyads in the late group
 had essentially no time in joint engagement until month 13 or 14, at which
 point their mean time increased sharply to high levels for the rest of the
 study. The fourth group of six dyads never showed an increase in their joint-
 engagement time, never engaging in significant amounts of joint engage-

 86

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CORRELATION MATRIX FOR TIME SPENT IN JOINT ENGAGEMENT AT EACH TIME POINT

 TABLE 5

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 JOINT JOINT ENGAGEMENT

 ENGAGEMENT 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 9 months ........... . - .10 .21 .25 -.03 -.01 .11
 10 months ........... . -.05 -.11 .04 -.26 -.19
 11 months ........... ... .23 .14 .25 .50*
 12 months ........... ... .15 .01 .42*
 13 months ........... ... .20 .19
 14 months ........... ? ? .25
 15 months ..........

 *p < .05, two tailed.

 ment; each dyad in this group had only 1 month in which they spent 30
 seconds or more in joint engagement, with none of the remaining months
 (before or after this 1 high month) reaching this level. It is very interesting
 to note that the first three groups all look very similar (50-70 seconds of joint
 engagement) during the period between 14 and 15 months; it is the age at
 which they begin to increase their time in joint engagement that differs.

 Although the majority of infants increased their time in joint engage-

 ment with age, most had fluctuations in their monthly values of joint engage-
 ment, sometimes dropping to zero or very small amounts of joint engagement
 for one session. Combined with the staggered onset times of emergence,
 these fluctuations were enough to produce instability in the amounts of time
 in joint engagement from month to month. Table 5 reports the correlations
 between joint-engagement time at different months. There were no signifi-
 cant correlations between consecutive monthly values of joint engagement,
 although time in joint engagement at 11 and 12 months was correlated with
 time in joint engagement at 15 months.

 Other Variables

 Potential effects of gender, birth order, and toy set used in the play ses-

 sion were analyzed for all three of the joint-engagement measures with re-
 peated-measures ANOVAs. The only significant finding was that later-born
 infants spent more time in joint engagement per session (M = 39.2 seconds)
 than firstborn infants (M = 25.7 seconds, F[1, 22] = 5.13, p < .05).

 Comparison with Previous Data

 Figure 18 displays the current group's average amount of joint-

 engagement time across months converted to percentages and compared

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 87

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 12"

 S 8-

 ,o

 " current study

 a e 64

 t "o .... --. B&A 1984

 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

 Age in Months

 FIGURE 18.-Comparison of mean percentage of time spent in joint engagement in the

 current study with that in Bakeman and Adamson (1984).

 with the corresponding data from the Bakeman and Adamson (1984) sample.
 Both studies found a significant increase in joint-engagement time with age,
 but the patterns were a bit different. As can be seen in Figure 18, the values
 at 9 months are nearly identical for the two samples, but then the current
 dyads show a steady monthly increase thereafter, in contrast to the Bakeman
 and Adamson sample, which shows no large increase in joint engagement
 until the 12-15-month time point. The current study's pattern of increase
 leveled off at 14-15 months, which would not be expected given Bakeman
 and Adamson's findings of a continued rise until 18 months of age. The cur-
 rent sample's value at 15 months (slightly, although not statistically, lower
 than 14 months) thus represents something of an aberration.

 Summary

 These analyses demonstrate that dyads in the current sample spent more

 time in joint engagement with age, mainly by increasing the frequency of
 joint-engagement episodes of similar durations. The significant rise in aver-
 age joint-engagement time during the period between 9 and 12 months re-
 sulted in large part from more infants participating in joint engagement for
 significant amounts of time for the first time. Infants began participating in
 significant amounts of joint engagement in either the early, the middle, or

 88

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 the late months of the study, or not at all in some cases. There were no sig-
 nificant intercorrelations among consecutive monthly measurements ofjoint-
 engagement time, reflecting a fundamental instability in this measure at the
 level of individual months. This presumably reflects the fact that an individual
 infant's social-cognitive skills are only one of the variables affecting this mea-
 sure, with other, more transient variables affecting time in joint engagement
 as well.

 Maternal Language

 Mothers' utterances to infants during the 9-, 12-, and 15-month play
 sessions were coded as utterances that attempted to follow into the infant's
 focus of attention (follow), as utterances that attempted to redirect the in-
 fant's attention (lead), or as other utterances. A repeated-measures ANOVA
 showed that the frequency of all maternal utterances did not increase sig-
 nificantly over time (M = 34.0 utterances at 9 months; M = 39.4 at 12
 months; and M = 41.0 at 15 months). Likewise, no significant difference was
 found between the number of following (M = 41.6) and the number of lead-
 ing (M = 34.7) utterances across the 3 months, and there was no interaction
 between month and utterance type.

 Maternal Language Intercorrelations

 Table 6 shows the intercorrelations among following and leading state-
 ments over time. The number of following statements at 9 months correlated
 significantly with the number of following statements at 12 and 15 months.
 The same was true for leading statements, indicating that mothers were fairly

 TABLE 6

 CORRELATION MATRIX OF MATERNAL LANGUAGE TYPES

 FOLLOW LEAD

 9 12 15 9 12 15

 Follow:

 9 months ........ ? ? .50* .62** .56** .41* .37
 12 months ........ ... .34 .16 .40* .32
 15 months ........ ... .42* .14 .30

 Lead:

 9 months ........ . .52** .56**
 12 months ........ ... .29
 15 months.......

 *p < .05, two tailed.
 ** p < .01, two tailed.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 89

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 consistent in their amount of both types of language over time. There were
 also some correlations between following and leading, reflecting the fact that
 these values are based on frequency of utterances, not proportions (i.e.,
 mothers who talked a lot had high values of both).

 Other Variables

 Repeated-measures ANOVAs showed no significant effects of gender,
 birth order, or toy set on amounts of either following or leading maternal
 utterances at 9, 12, or 15 months.

 Infant Communication Measures

 Communication measures in this study were maternal reports of infants'

 communicative gestures and comprehension and production of language us-
 ing the MacArthur CDI Infant Form.

 Gestures

 Figure 19a displays the mean number of different types of gestures re-
 corded at each monthly age on the CDI (which includes 12 possible gestures).
 The use of communicative gestures clearly increased over time for the current
 sample. Infants averaged about two gestures (range 0-7, SD = 1.7) at 9
 months and steadily increased to over eight gestures (range 3-12, SD = 2.1)
 at 15 months. There was a highly significant age effect (F[6, 23] = 74.99,
 p < .001), with both significant linear (F[1, 23] = 440.27, p < .001) and
 significant quadratic (F[1, 23] = 8.03, p < .01) trends. The curvilinear nature
 of these data seems to reflect the restricted range of the gesture measure at
 the high end.

 Comprehension of Words

 The average number of words comprehended by infants (as reported by

 mothers on the CDI) increased with age in a predictable manner (see Figure
 19b). This increase was significant (F[6, 23] = 47.13, p < .001) and had sig-
 nificant linear (F[1, 23] = 271.52, p < .001) and quadratic (F[1, 23] = 11.07,

 FIGURE 19.-a, Mean number of gestures produced at each time point. b, Mean number
 of words comprehended at each time point. c, Mean number of words produced at each
 time point (from the CDI). (Vertical lines are standard errors of the mean.)

 90

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 10

 9

 8

 7

 4

 3-

 2

 0

 160

 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

 Age in Months

 ' 140

 "100

 l so
 go

 - 60-

 Z

 S 20

 0

 18

 16

 14

 12

 o io
 10-
 8-

 Z 6

 S 4

 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

 Age in Months

 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

 Age in Months

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 p < .01) trends. All infants followed a similar pattern of incremental increases
 each month, although these increases differed in magnitude. Thus, at any
 given age, their scores had a wide range; for example, at 9 months, the range
 was 0-42 words comprehended, and, by 15 months, the scores ranged from
 6 to 281 words comprehended. The quadratic trend in this case seems to
 reflect a positively accelerating curve as infants begin comprehending words
 at different ages and then proceed at an ever more rapid rate over the course
 of the period between 9 and 15 months.

 Production of Words

 Figure 19c displays the mean number of words that infants produced at

 each age (as reported on the CDI). Mean production between 9 and 15
 months increased significantly with age (F[6, 23] = 11.02, p < .001). This
 effect had significant linear (F[1, 23] = 61.35, p < .001) and quadratic (F[1,
 23] = 4.52, p < .05) trends. Mean production at 9 months was 0.42 words,
 which was a product of nine infants whose scores ranged between one and
 two words and 15 infants who produced no words. By 15 months, all infants
 had at least one word in their productive vocabularies, with a range of 1-84
 words. Again, the quadratic trend seems to reflect a positively accelerating
 curve as more infants begin to produce words at each age and at an ever
 more rapid rate within infants over the course of the study.

 Production was also measured at 18 and 24 months by means of mailing

 CDI Toddler Forms to mothers. Twenty mothers responded at 18 months
 (M = 67.6 words, range 3-210 words), and 15 mothers responded at 24
 months (M = 194.6 words, range 10-559 words). A repeated-measures AN-
 OVA indicated that neither group of responders at these two ages differed
 significantly from the nonresponders on their production scores during the
 period between 9 and 15 months.

 Individual Patterns of Communication

 It is important to note that, unlike the joint-engagement measures, for
 the communication measures all infants showed similar accumulating curves;
 they just began at different times. This simply reflects the cumulative nature
 of these measures as both mothers and researchers assume that children's
 gestural and linguistic repertoires are ever increasing over age (whereas joint
 engagement during a specified 10-minute period may fluctuate for children
 over time).

 The three communication measures were quite stable over time. Correla-

 tions between consecutive monthly values for gestures ranged from r = .77
 to r = .94, with a mean r of .85. Correlations between consecutive monthly

 92

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 values for comprehension ranged from r = .70 to r = .98, with a mean r of
 .92. Correlations between consecutive monthly values for production ranged
 from r = .39 to r = .99, with a mean r of .79.

 Finally, intercorrelations among the three communication measures
 were calculated for the final age point of 15 months. Number of gestures
 produced and number of words comprehended were significantly correlated
 (r = .43, p < .05), but number of words produced did not correlate with
 either number of gestures produced (r = .21) or number of words compre-
 hended (r = .20).

 Other Variables

 Repeated-measures ANOVAs found no significant differences for gender

 or birth order on any of the three communication measures.

 Comparison to MacArthur Norms

 The communication measures of the current sample compared to the
 MacArthur Infant Form norming study (Fenson et al., 1993) in the following
 ways. The absolute values for gestures were not directly comparable because
 the MacArthur analyses grouped several subscales that were not measured in
 the current study. However, the gesture curve of the current study closely
 resembles that of the MacArthur's total gestures. The comprehension and
 production scores for each infant in the current study at 15 months were
 ranked by the MacArthur fitted percentile scores (which are also broken
 down by gender). The average percentile rank for the current group's com-
 prehension was 46 and ranged between the 5th and the 99th percentiles. For
 production, the current infants averaged at the 35th percentile and ranged
 between the 5th and the 99th percentiles. At 18 and 24 months, the current
 group's production reported on the CDI Toddler Form ranked at the 35th
 and 31st percentiles, respectively, both ranging between the 5th and the 90th
 percentile ranks of the CDI norming study. The relatively low production
 values in the current study may have resulted from our slight change of proce-
 dure (discussed above), in which mothers were encouraged to report only
 words that their infant used in a relatively flexible manner.

 Summary

 Infants in the current study gradually acquired means of communication
 over the course of the study, with the number of gestures produced and words
 comprehended and produced rising steadily over the period between 9 and
 15 months. The infants looked very similar in their gesture production and

 93

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 word comprehension to the MacArthur norming sample, whereas they were
 slightly below average in their production of words (perhaps owing to the
 more stringent criteria used for flexible word production in the current
 study).

 DEVELOPMENTAL INTERRELATIONS

 Our main interest in this study was in how joint attentional engagement
 and maternal language predict infants' very earliest communication skills. In
 all analyses, the measure of joint attentional engagement used was time in
 joint engagement, and the measure of maternal language used was number
 of utterances that followed into the infant's already-established attentional
 focus (termed maternal following; in some cases, correlations with maternal lead-
 ing utterances were also computed for comparative purposes). Results are
 organized by the three communication skills investigated: gestures, compre-
 hension of words, and production of words.

 For each of the three communication measures, we look first at how

 joint engagement and then maternal language correlate with communica-
 tion skills on a month-by-month basis. In all cases, we use Pearson product-
 moment correlations, two tailed, with 22 degrees of freedom. For the joint-
 engagement measure, we also look at how the four different styles of joint
 engagement that characterized the dyads (i.e., early, middle, late, and never)
 relate to communication skills.

 We then take a multivariate approach to predicting the communication
 skills, using multiple regression analyses to assess the predictive values of joint
 engagement and maternal following taken together and taken individually
 controlling for the other. To keep the number of equations manageable, the
 following procedure was followed. First, the outcome ages for each of the
 communication measures were established as 9, 12, and 15 months only
 (the first, middle, and last months of the study). Second, the same was done
 for the predictor variables, but with a slight modification. In the case of joint
 engagement, because the measure was unstable over time, we decided to rep-
 resent its values at 9, 12, and 15 months for a given dyad as the amount of
 time that that dyad spent in joint engagement during all the months accumu-
 lated up to that month. Thus, 9 months is simply the amount of time at 9
 months; 12 months is the amount of time at 9, 10, 11, and 12 months added
 together; and 15 months is the total amount of time a dyad spent in joint
 engagement added across all seven monthly data points." To provide com-

 "n Note that, since all dyads had values at all months, this procedure is statistically equiva-

 lent to dividing each dyad's value by the number of months involved to derive an average
 monthly value.

 94

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 parability, the same was done for the maternal following measure, although
 it should be recalled that this measure was taken only at 9, 12, and 15 months.
 It is important to note in this regard that the communication measures were
 already cumulative (a noncumulative measure of productive vocabulary, e.g.,
 would be the number of new words acquired since the previous month, which
 is seldom done). Third and finally, predictions of outcome variables were
 made for age points concurrent with and older than the predictor variables,
 but not for prior age points (e.g., Joint Engagement 12 was used to predict
 gestures at 12 and 15 months but not at 9 months).

 Thus, for each of the three outcome measures (gestures, word compre-
 hension, and word production), six regression equations were run, three of
 the form

 Joint Engagement 9 + Maternal Following 9 -- outcome at 9, 12, and 15 months,

 two of the form

 Joint Engagement 12 + Maternal Following 12 -- outcome at 12 and 15 months,

 and one of the form

 Joint Engagement 15 + Maternal Following 15 -- outcome at 15 months.

 The intercorrelations between the predictor variables at these different

 times are presented in Table 7. There were no significant correlations be-
 tween joint engagement and maternal following at any of the time points
 tested, and, in fact, none of these correlations exceed .20. Correlations within
 each variable at the three time points were quite strong, as would be expected
 (thus corroborating that making joint engagement a cumulative variable
 helped considerably in stabilizing the measure).

 TABLE 7

 INTERCORRELATIONS BETWEEN THE PREDICTOR VARIABLESJOINT ENGAGEMENT AND

 MATERNAL FOLLOWING

 JOINT ENGAGEMENT MATERNAL FOLLOWING

 9 12 15 9 12 15

 Joint engagement:

 9 months ......... ... .57** .31 .02 .07 -.01
 12 months ......... ... .75*** .05 .12 .17
 15 months ......... ... -.01 .15 .20

 Maternal following:

 9 months ............ .86*** .86***
 12 months ......... ... .94***
 15 months.........

 ** p < .01, two tailed.
 *** p < .001, two tailed.

 95

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Gestures

 Correlations with Joint Engagement

 Time spent in joint engagement at 9, 11, 12, and 15 months was signifi-
 cantly, positively correlated with gestures at various ages between 10 and 13
 months (see Table 8). Although the correlations were scattered across the
 time points, 80% of the significant correlations occurred between early joint
 engagement (9-12 months) and early gestures (10-13 months), with correla-
 tions in both chronological directions. Also note that the correlations be-
 tween joint engagement at 9 months and gestures at 9, 10, and 13 months
 approached significance (i.e., are .34 or greater, p < .10, two tailed). This
 matrix shows a pattern of relatedness between joint engagement between 9
 and 12 months and communicative gestures almost totally at early ages.

 As an additional way of assessing month-by-month relatedness of joint

 engagement and gestures, we also used the four different styles of joint en-
 gagement. Figure 20 illustrates the gesture production of the four groups
 (i.e., early, middle, late, and never) across the 7 months of the study. Because
 of the small numbers of participants in each of the groups, for purposes of
 statistical analysis we collapsed the groups into two: the earlier emergence
 group comprising the early and middle groups (N = 11) and the later emer-
 gence group comprising the late and never groups (N = 13). A repeated-
 measures ANOVA was conducted on the two collapsed groups (earlier and
 later) to investigate differences in the groups' rate of gesture production. The
 overall effect of group approached significance (F[1, 22] = 3.35, p = .08).
 The gesture production of these groups began to diverge around 11 months,
 and the gesture production of the earlier group exceeded that of the later group
 at 12 months (t[22] = 7.48, p < .05) and at 13 months (t[22] = 4.31, p < .05).
 Significant differences were not found at 14 or 15 months, perhaps because of
 the ceiling imposed by the gesture measure (there was a maximum of 12).

 TABLE 8

 CORRELATION MATRIX FORJOINT ENGAGEMENT AND GESTURE PRODUCTION AT EACH TIME POINT

 JOINT

 ENGAGEMENT 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 GESTURE PRODUCTION

 9 months ......... .35 .35 .46* .45* .35 .28 .18
 10 months ......... -.31 -.21 -.11 -.12 -.09 -.05 .09
 11 months ......... -.02 .12 .30 .62** .54** .39 .23
 12 months ......... .37 .49* .51 .48* .43* .24 .32
 13 months ......... -.28 .06 .02 .23 .18 .28 .36
 14 months ......... -.19 -.12 -.03 .19 .12 .35 .27
 15 months ......... .34 .33 .45* .42* .28 .16 .14

 *p < .05, two tailed.
 ** p < .01, two tailed.

 96

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 12-

 10

 6g-

 4*- New

 2

 0 I I I I I I I
 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

 Age in Months

 FIGURE 20.-Mean gesture production of the early, middle, late, and never joint-

 engagement groups at each time point.

 Correlations with Maternal Following Language

 There were no significant correlations between infants' use of communi-

 cative gestures and maternal following language. Two significant correlations
 were found between maternal leading language and gestures: there was a pos-
 itive correlation (r = .63, p < .01, two tailed) between maternal leading lan-
 guage at 9 months and gestures at 9 months and a negative correlation (r =
 -.48, p < .05, two tailed) between maternal leading language at 12 months
 and gestures at 14 months. Thus, essentially no relation was found between
 maternal language and infants' gestures, and none should be expected since
 maternal language is not a direct source of information for infants learning
 to produce gestures.

 Regressions

 Six regression equations were calculated between the two predictor vari-
 ables (joint engagement and maternal following) and the gesture measure
 in accordance with the analytic strategy outlined above (see Table 9). The
 only significant equation was found for the relations among the predictors
 at 12 months and the gestures at 12 months (F[2, 21] = 10.56, p < .001).
 Together, joint engagement and maternal following at 12 months accounted
 for about 45% of the variance in the number of gestures at that same age.

 97

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 TABLE 9

 SUMMARY OF REGRESSION ANALYSES FOR JOINT ENGAGEMENT AND MATERNAL FOLLOWING

 VARIABLES PREDICTING GESTURE PRODUCTION

 GESTURE PRODUCTION

 9 Months 12 Months 15 Months

 VARIABLE p t p t

 Joint Engagement 9 ............. N.S. N.S. N.S.
 Maternal Follow 9.............

 Joint Engagement 12 ............. .71 4.55*** N.S
 Maternal Follow 12 ............. -.18 -1.16

 Joint Engagement 15 .........N.S
 Maternal Follow 15............

 ***p < .001, two tailed.

 Furthermore, when Maternal Following 12 was controlled for statistically,
 Joint Engagement 12 was a significant and strong predictor of number of
 gestures (P = .71), but maternal following did not significantly predict ges-
 tures when joint engagement was held constant.

 Summary

 A significant positive relation was found between joint engagement and
 the production of gestures in the early months of the study (especially at 12
 and 13 months of age). That is, the simple correlations showed a positive
 relation between joint engagement and gesture production at the earlier ages
 but not at the later ages. The regression analyses found a strong relation
 between joint engagement at 12 months and gestures at 12 months. In con-
 trast, maternal following language had virtually no relation with gesture pro-
 duction at any age. Together, these analyses reveal a window of time from 9
 to 12 months when joint engagement and gestures are related but when ma-
 ternal language and gestures have basically no relation.

 Comprehension of Words

 Correlations with Joint Engagement

 Time spent in joint engagement at 11, 12, and 13 months was signifi-
 cantly, positively correlated with word comprehension at various ages between
 9 and 15 months (see Table 10), again in both chronological directions. All

 98

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 TABLE 10

 CORRELATION MATRIX FORJOINT ENGAGEMENT AND WORD COMPREHENSION AT EACH TIME POINT

 JOINT

 ENGAGEMENT 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 WORD COMPREHENSION

 9 months ....... -.20 .05 .24 .27 .25 .21 .18
 10 months ....... -.21 .09 .31 .39 .36 .34 .27
 11 months ....... .14 .41* .46* .43* .44* .43* .39
 12 months ....... .53** .45* .31 .31 .45* .52** .58**
 13 months ....... .17 .40* .47* .48* .47* .39 .27
 14 months ....... .04 .15 .15 .13 .13 .16 .16
 15 months ....... .10 .34 .26 .23 .24 .23 .26

 *p < .05, two tailed.
 ** p < .01, two tailed.

 14 of the significant correlations in this matrix occurred with joint engage-
 ment in this small window of time between 11 and 13 months. Note also that
 correlations between joint engagement at 10 months and word comprehen-
 sion at 12, 13, and 14 months approached significance. Together these corre-
 lations show that joint engagement in the middle months (11, 12, 13) is re-
 lated to word comprehension in the early, middle, and later months.

 Figure 21 shows the word-comprehension levels of the four joint-
 engagement styles. As was done in the analysis of gestures, two groups were

 200

 175

 SI 150

 125 Early

 10'10

 0 Middle

 - S Late
 S 75 - - Never

 Z-a

 50 s50

 25 -

 ...- W

 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

 Age in Months

 FIGURE 21.-Mean language comprehension of the early, middle, late, and never joint-

 engagement groups at each time point.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 99

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 formed for purposes of statistical analysis: a group of earlier emergence and
 a group of later emergence dyads. A one-way ANOVA found that the earlier
 group comprehended significantly more words than did the later emergence
 group over the course of the study (F[1, 22] = 10.12, p < .01). A significant
 interaction between age and emergence group was also found (F[6, 22] =
 7.31, p < .0001): the rate of increase in comprehension was high for the
 earlier emergence group throughout the study, while comprehension of the
 later emergence group did not begin to increase sharply until after 12 months
 of age. Thus, those infants who began participating in joint engagement at
 younger ages (i.e., by 12 months) understood more words at each age be-
 tween 10 and 15 months than infants whose joint-engagement skills emerged
 later, sometime after 12 months of age (all 6 t tests, p < .05).

 Correlations with Maternal Following Language

 Many significant positive correlations can be seen between maternal fol-
 lowing language and word comprehension in Table 11, predominantly be-
 tween maternal following at 12 months and word comprehension at 11-15
 months (with word comprehension at 15 months correlating with maternal
 following at all three time points). In contrast, maternal leading language
 did not correlate with word comprehension at any age. The simple correla-
 tions thus reveal a particularly strong relation between maternal following
 language at 12 months and word comprehension at the later ages.

 Regressions

 Table 12 displays the results from the six regression equations calculated
 between the predictor variables and word comprehension at 9, 12, and 15

 CORRELATION MATRIX FOR MATERNAL LANGUAGE AND WORD COMPREHENSION

 TABLE 11

 MATERNAL
 LANGUAGE 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

 WORD COMPREHENSION

 Follow:

 9 months ............ .07 .27 .26 .28 .30 .35 .42*
 12 months ........... -.18 .39 .56** .60** .53** .51** .44*
 15 months ........... .44* .41* .29 .27 .30 .35 .45*

 Lead:

 9 months ........... .01 .06 .02 .07 .10 .15 .22
 12 months ........... -.10 .17 .25 .26 .23 .22 .22
 15 months ........... -.06 -.01 .01 .04 .07 .12 .21

 *p < .05, two tailed.
 ** p < .01, two tailed.

 100

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 TABLE 12

 SUMMARY OF REGRESSION ANALYSES FORJOINT ENGAGEMENT AND MATERNAL FOLLOWING VARIABLES

 PREDICTING WORD COMPREHENSION

 WORD COMPREHENSION

 9 Months 12 Months 15 Months

 VARIABLE t t t

 Joint Engagement 9........... N.S. N.S. N.S.
 Maternal Follow 9............

 Joint Engagement 12 .......... .54 3.62** .61 4.52***
 Maternal Follow 12 ............ .45 3.05** .43 3.13**

 Joint Engagement 15 .......... .49 3.20**
 Maternal Follow 15 ............ .44 2.85**

 **p < .01, two tailed.
 *** p < .001, two tailed.

 months. Joint engagement and maternal following at 9 months did not pre-
 dict word comprehension at any age. However, joint engagement and mater-
 nal following at both the 12- and the 15-month time points significantly pre-
 dicted word comprehension at 12 and 15 months. First, joint engagement
 and maternal following at 12 months predicted word comprehension at 12
 months (F[2, 21] = 12.62, p < .001, Adjusted R2 = .50). Taken separately,
 Joint Engagement 12 and Maternal Following 12 were each significant pre-
 dictors of comprehension, with beta weights of .54 and .45, respectively (for
 t values, see Table 12). Similarly, joint engagement and maternal following
 at 12 months predicted word comprehension at 15 months (F[2, 21] = 16.94,
 p < .001, Adjusted R2 = .58). Taken separately, Joint Engagement 12 and
 Maternal Following 12 individually predicted word comprehension at 15
 months, with beta weights of .61 and .43, respectively (for t values, see Table
 12). Finally, joint engagement and maternal following at 15 months also pre-
 dicted word comprehension at 15 months (F[2, 21] = 11.43, p < .001, Ad-
 justed R2 = .48). Taken separately, Joint Engagement 15 and Maternal Fol-
 lowing 15 individually predicted word comprehension at 15 months, with beta
 weights of .49 and .44, respectively (for t values, see Table 12). In sum, both
 joint engagement and maternal following at both 12 and 15 months were
 significant predictors of word comprehension at those same and later age
 points.

 Summary

 Comprehension of words was greater between 10 and 15 months of age
 for infants whose joint-engagement skills had emerged by 12 months than
 for infants whose joint engagement emerged later. Simple correlations dem-

 101

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 TABLE 13

 CORRELATION MATRIX FORJOINT ENGAGEMENT AND WORD PRODUCTION AT EACH TIME POINT

 JOINT

 ENGAGEMENT 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 18a 24b

 WORD PRODUCTION

 9 months ..... -.36 -.01 -.01 -.01 .04 -.02 -.07 -.04 -.16
 10 months ..... -.21 -.32 -.27 -.08 .01 .04 .02 -.16 -.11
 11 months ..... .19 .09 -.19 -.16 -.11 -.12 -.18 .01 -.14
 12 months ..... .19 .29 .18 -.02 -.12 -.14 -.16 -.02 -.14
 13 months ..... .04 .31 -.02 .04 .00 .06 .09 .33 .29
 14 months ..... .15 .16 -.04 .36 .41* .43* .52** .63** .56**
 15 months ..... .09 .25 -.16 -.14 -.15 -.14 -.10 -.05 -.09

 "aN = 20.
 bN= 15.
 *p < .05, two tailed.
 ** p < .01, two tailed.

 onstrated that both joint engagement and maternal following were signifi-
 cantly related to word comprehension, particularly during the middle months
 (11, 12, and 13 months). Regression analyses showed that each of these vari-
 ables independently was a strong predictor of word comprehension at both
 12 and 15 months. Together, and by themselves, these two variables predicted
 over half the variance in infants' comprehension vocabularies.

 Production of Words

 Correlations with Joint Engagement

 Table 13 illustrates that the only time at which joint engagement corre-

 lated with word production was at 14 months. That is, joint engagement at
 14 months correlated positively and significantly with word production at 13,
 14, 15, 18, and 24 months (and the correlation with production at 12 months
 approached significance). The correlations with production were especially
 strong at the later ages (i.e., 15, 18, and 24 months), and it therefore appears
 that a relation between joint engagement and later production may begin at
 around 14 months. This trend was not seen with joint engagement at 15
 months, probably because of the less than expected amount of joint-engage-
 ment time that month.

 Figure 22a shows the word-production levels of the four joint-engage-
 ment styles. Again, for purposes of statistical analysis, a group of earlier emer-
 gence and a group of later emergence dyads were formed. No significant
 difference was found between the earlier and the later groups in their
 amounts of word production. It can also be seen in Figure 22a that the word
 production of the late emergence group is numerically (although not statisti-

 102

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 30-

 25-

 ' I

 20 -

 " -( Early

 W I
 V 15 Middle
 -a sS- - Late
 -' - - - Never

 o-

 S10 -

 5 -'

 0 10 -

 0 I I I I I
 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

 Age in Months

 30

 25

 z 20

 06Early
 M 15-
 l p Middle

 tou I--*--Late

 S- Never

 S10-

 5-,-
 0

 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

 Age in Months

 FIGlP, 22.-Mean language production of the early, middle, late, and never joint-
 engagement groups at each time point. a, With outlier participant from the late group.
 b, Without outlier participant from the late group.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 CORRELATION MATRIX FOR MATERNAL LANGUAGE AND WORD PRODUCTION

 TABLE 14

 WORD PRODUCTION

 MATERNAL LANGUAGE 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 18a 24b

 Follow:

 9 months ...... .27 -.10 .03 .31 .42* .43* .44* .23 .36
 12 months ...... -.08 -.03 -.24 .15 .30 .33 .36 .15 .24
 15 months ...... -.03 -.11 .00 .22 .31 .30 .32 .19 .19

 Lead:

 9 months ...... -.33 -.18 -.25 -.06 -.02 .04 .06 .02 -.18
 12 months ...... -.21 -.17 -.53** -.23 .01 .02 .07 .01 .03
 15 months ...... -.11 -.14 -.03 .10 .00 .01 .07 .01 -.24

 "aN= 20.
 bN= 15.
 *p < .05, two tailed.
 ** p < .01, two tailed.

 cally) higher than that of the other three groups. This is primarily the result
 of one infant in that group who had extremely high production scores be-
 tween 12 and 15 months of age. For instance, this outlier infant's productive
 vocabulary at 15 months was 84 words, several times the amount of any other
 participant. Figure 22b presents the same data while excluding this outlier
 infant and better illustrates the similarity between the word production of
 the four groups.

 Correlations with Maternal Following Language

 Maternal following language at 9 months was significantly and positively
 correlated with production at 13, 14, and 15 months (see Table 14). One
 significant negative correlation was found between maternal leading language
 at 12 months and production at 11 months. Although not significant, the
 correlations between maternal leading language and production are all nega-
 tive or less than .10, and the correlations between maternal following lan-
 guage and production in the period between 13 and 15 months are all posi-
 tive and .30 or higher. Thus, there is apparently a much weaker relation
 between maternal following and word production than between maternal fol-
 lowing and word comprehension, with the only reliable correlations being
 between a very early measure of maternal following and word production
 several months later.

 Regressions

 To predict word production at the 18- and 24-month time points in addi-
 tion to the 9-, 12-, and 15-month time points, twelve equations were required

 104

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 TABLE 15

 SUMMARY OF REGRESSION ANALYSES FORJOINT ENGAGEMENT AND MATERNAL FOLLOWING VARIABLES

 PREDICTING WORD PRODUCTION

 WORD PRODUCTION

 9 12 18 24

 Months Months 15 Months Monthsa Monthsb

 VARIABLE 3 t 3 t 3 t t t

 Joint Engagement 9 ......
 Maternal Follow 9 ........

 9...... N.S. N.S. N.S. N.S. N.S.

 Joint Engagement 12 ..... -.26 -1.39
 Maternal Follow 12 ....... .52 2.80** N.S. N.S.
 Joint Engagement 15 .....
 Maternal Follow 15.......

 Maternal Follow 15 ... ... N.S. N.S. N.S.

 "aN = 20.
 bN= 15.
 ** p < .01, two tailed.

 (see Table 15). The only significant prediction was made by joint engagement
 and maternal following at 12 months for word production at 15 months (F[2,
 21] = 4.50, p < .05, Adjusted R2 = .23). When joint engagement was statisti-
 cally controlled, Maternal Following 12 significantly predicted word produc-
 tion (B = .52), but, when maternal following was controlled, Joint Engage-
 ment 12 did not significantly predict word production (B = -.26; for tvalues,
 see Table 15).

 Calibration of Joint-Engagement Analyses

 The quantitative relation between joint engagement and word produc-
 tion was not as strong as had been predicted, so we explored the relation
 further in a subsequent analysis. We began by noting that the only significant
 correlations between joint engagement and word production occurred with
 the measure of joint engagement at 14 months, which was also the month
 with the greatest amount of joint engagement observed in the study. This
 suggested that word production may not correlate with joint engagement un-
 til a certain amount of time is spent in joint engagement (until the measure
 gets "off the floor" longitudinally). Coupled with the previous descriptions of
 individual styles of joint engagement, which showed that individuals reached
 criterion levels of joint engagement (i.e., 30 seconds) at different times
 throughout the study, this suggested an approach in which the relation is
 explored for individuals only after they attain a criterion amount of joint-
 engagement time.

 Following this line of reasoning, the joint-engagement and word-

 105

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 production measures were "calibrated" for the age at which the joint-
 engagement criterion was met. That is, individual infants' joint-engagement
 and word-production measures were paired and set to a starting point de-
 fined by the month when joint-engagement time first totaled at least 30
 seconds. The month that this criterion was met by an individual infant was
 denoted as Joint Engagement 0, and Word Production 0 was then defined as word
 production for that infant at that same month. Thus, each infant's joint-
 engagement and word-production values were calibrated to the age at which
 a minimum amount of time was spent in joint engagement (instead of strictly
 by age, as in the previous analyses). These calibrated joint-engagement and
 word-production data were compared at three time points: at the month of
 joint-engagement criterion (Joint Engagement 0, Word Production 0), 1
 month later (Joint Engagement 1, Word Production 1), and 2 months after
 the criterion month (Joint Engagement 2, Word Production 2). Cumulative
 values of joint-engagement time and word production were used.12 Simple
 correlations were run with joint engagement and word production at these
 three time points. Because four infants met joint-engagement criterion at 14
 or 15 months, they could not be included in all three time points. Therefore,
 all 24 infants were included at the first time point (Joint Engagement 0), 23
 infants at the next time point (Joint Engagement 1), and 20 infants at the
 last time point (Joint Engagement 2).

 Correlations with joint engagement.-Calibrating to joint-engagement crite-

 rion revealed significant positive correlations between joint engagement and
 word production at these three time points (see Table 16). The amount of
 time spent in joint engagement up through the month in which the criterion
 was met (Joint Engagement 0) was strongly related to word production at
 the same month (r = .59) and 1 month later (r = .63) (the correlation
 with word production 2 months later was .44, p = .056, two tailed). Joint-
 engagement time up to 1 month after criterion (Joint Engagement 1) ap-
 proached a significant correlation with word production at the same time at
 Word Production 1 (r = .40, p = .058), and it related quite strongly with
 production 1 month later at Word Production 2 (r = .66). Joint engagement
 and word production 2 months after joint engagement reached criterion

 "1 Values of joint engagement were cumulated from 9 months up to the month ofjoint-

 engagement criterion (and 1 and 2 months after for Joint Engagement 1 and Joint Engage-
 ment 2) and thus consisted of the total amount of joint engagement until the age when the
 criterion was met (or 1 or 2 months after). A second version of this analysis used joint-
 engagement values beginning at the month of criterion and cumulating over the next two
 time points. Because most subjects had low levels of joint engagement prior to their first
 criterion month, these two versions of the data produced nearly identical results, with only
 slight differences in the strengths of relations but not in the pattern of significant findings.
 The results of the first version, which cumulates across the entire study, are reported here.

 106

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 TABLE 16

 CORRELATION MATRIX FOR CALIBRATEDJOINT ENAGAGEMENT AND WORD PRODUCTION

 WoRD PRODUCTION

 Word Word Word

 JOINT ENGAGEMENT Production 0a Production lb Production 2c

 Joint Engagement 0 ......... .59** .63** .44
 Joint Engagement 1 ......... ... .40 .66**
 Joint Engagement 2 ......... ... ... .61**

 "aN= 24.
 bN= 23.
 cN= 20.
 ** p < .01, two tailed.

 (Joint Engagement 2 and Word Production 2) were also strongly correlated
 at .61.

 Thus, when joint engagement and word production are examined dur-
 ing the window of time in which joint-engagement time first reaches a mini-
 mum criterion, a strong, positive relation is found between these two vari-
 ables.

 Correlations with maternal following language.-Maternal following language
 measures were collected at only three time points and could not be cali-
 brated in a similar manner to the monthly joint-engagement data; therefore,
 the total number of maternal following utterances across the entire study
 was used to represent maternal following (i.e., Maternal Following 15 from
 previous analyses) in similar analyses using the previously calibrated word-
 production data at time points Word Production 0, Word Production 1, and
 Word Production 2. No significant correlations existed between these mea-
 sures (r = .36, .35, and -.22 at Word Production 0, Word Production 1, and
 Word Production 2, respectively).

 Regressions.-To follow up on these new correlations, multiple regression

 analyses were repeated using these calibrated data. Thus, joint engagement
 at three time points (Joint Engagement 0, Joint Engagement 1, and Joint
 Engagement 2) and maternal following across all ages (Maternal Following
 15) were used as predictors of word production at the same time points
 (Word Production 0, Word Production 1, and Word Production 2) in an iden-
 tical manner to the previous regression equations with the original word-
 production measures.

 Five of the six equations tested indicated significant predictive power.
 Joint Engagement 0 and Maternal Following 15 predicted word production
 at the first and second time points, Word Production 0 and Word Production
 1, accounting for 47% and 50% of the variance, respectively (for Word Pro-
 duction 0, F[2, 21] = 11.08, p < .001; for Word Production 1, F[2, 20] =

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 107

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 TABLE 17

 SUMMARY OF REGRESSION ANALYSES FOR CALIBRATED JOINT ENGAGEMENT AND MATERNAL

 FOLLOWING VARIABLES PREDICTING WORD PRODUCTION

 WORD PRODUCTION

 Word Word Word

 Production 0a Production lb Production 2c

 VARIABLE t t t

 Joint Engagement 0 ............. .63 4.09*** .65 4.30***
 Maternal Follow 15 ............. .42 2.71* .38 2.53*

 N.S.

 Joint Engagement 1 ............. .48 2.60* .66 3.42**
 Maternal Follow 15 ............. .43 2.35* .01 .03

 Joint Engagement 2 ............. .59 2.97**
 Maternal Follow 15 ............. -.06 -.29

 "aN = 24.
 bN= 23.
 cN= 20.
 *p < .05, two tailed.
 ** p < .01, two tailed.
 *** p < .001, two tailed.

 11.91, p < .001). Table 17 shows that the individual relations between these
 predictor variables and production outcomes were similar at both time
 points: Joint Engagement 0 significantly predicted word production at Word
 Production 0 and Word Production 1, with beta weights of .63 and .65, respec-
 tively, when Maternal Following 15 was held constant. Maternal Following 15
 also had unique, significant predictive value with beta weights of .42 and .38,
 respectively, when Joint Engagement 0 was held constant.

 Likewise, Joint Engagement 1 and Maternal Following 15 together were

 significant predictors of concurrent and later production (at Word Produc-
 tion 1 and Word Production 2), accounting for 28% of the variance at Word
 Production 1 (F[2, 20] = 5.19, p < .05) and 37% of the variance at Word
 Production 2 (F[2, 17] = 6.60, p < .01). Individually, joint engagement and
 maternal following were each significant predictors of production at Word
 Production 1, with similar beta weights of .48 and .43, respectively. In con-
 trast, only Joint Engagement 1 was significantly correlated with word produc-
 tion at Word Production 2 (B = .66), with Maternal Following 15 having virtu-
 ally no relation to Word Production 2 values (B = .01) at this later age.
 Finally, at the last time point, Joint Engagement 2 and Maternal Following
 15 together were significant predictors of word production at the same
 month, Word Production 2 (F[2, 17] = 5.09, p < .05). Again, Joint Engage-
 ment 2 was a significant predictor of production at Word Production 2 (B =
 .59), whereas Maternal Following 15 was not (B = -.06).

 108

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 Summary

 The amount of time that mother-infant dyads spent in joint engagement
 was only weakly related to infants' production of words when these two mea-
 sures were correlated on a month-by-month basis. In contrast, when joint
 engagement and word production were calibrated in terms of a criterion level
 ofjoint engagement, a consistently strong relation was revealed between these
 two variables. Several strong correlations were found between joint engage-
 ment and concurrent and later word production. Regression analyses con-
 firmed this strong relation, finding that joint engagement at each time point
 was a significant predictor of word production at each time point. Factoring
 out this relation with joint engagement, maternal following language was also
 shown to be a significant predictor of word production at the 1st and 2d
 month after joint engagement met criterion but not 2 months after. Together
 these results suggest that a relation between joint engagement and word pro-
 duction does not begin until a significant amount of time is spent in joint
 engagement. Maternal following language relates positively to production at
 earlier ages but not at later ages, suggesting infants' lesser reliance on this
 maternal adjustment with age.

 Correlations with the Social-Cognitive Measures from Study 1

 The social-cognitive skills investigated in Study 1 might be supposed to

 have some relation to infants' communicative skills, and, indeed, in that
 study, the age of emergence of a number of these skills related quite strongly
 with the age of emergence of infants' first referential word-as reported
 there. There is less reason to suspect, however, that the social-cognitive mea-
 sures from Study 1 should relate strongly to infants' communication skills as
 assessed quantitatively in terms of number of words and the like. Our reason-
 ing follows closely the reasoning of Tomasello and Farrar (1986b) with regard
 to the relation between object permanence and children's early vocabulary.
 Briefly, many studies in the 1970s investigated whether children who at-
 tained object permanence at an earlier age had larger vocabularies of object
 labels at some later age, investigations based on the reasonable assumption
 that, to name objects, the child should have a stable conception of them.
 However, a number of studies found that there was basically no relation be-
 tween age of object permanence attainment (of whatever stage) and vocabu-
 lary size (for a review, see Corrigan, 1979). The point is that several subse-
 quent studies showed that there was a relation between the age of emergence
 of certain object permanence skills and certain types of words (e.g., Gopnik,
 1984; Tomasello & Farrar, 1986b); it is just that the relation did not extend

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 109

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 to quantitative parameters involving the actual number of words learned. The
 overall conclusion is that, whereas certain cognitive skills are prerequisite to
 being able to learn words, the major determinants of the number of words
 learned are other things, presumably social factors having to do with the na-
 ture of the language spoken to the child, how that language is integrated
 with the ongoing interaction, and so forth.

 In the current case, the reasoning was that, whereas such things as atten-
 tion following and imitative learning are very likely prerequisites of word
 learning and should therefore be related to infants' ability to acquire words,
 there is no reason to suspect that the age of emergence of these skills for a
 given infant should be related in a systematic way to the number of words
 the infant acquires. Nevertheless, for the sake of completeness, in a final set
 of analyses we correlated the age of emergence of the various social-cognitive
 measures from Study 1 with the quantitative monthly measures of joint en-
 gagement from Study 2.

 As expected, although there were a few reliable positive (at earlier
 months) and negative (at later months) correlations, the correlations as a
 group were not consistently high. When the ages of emergence of the social-
 cognitive measures were correlated with infants' production of gestures and
 comprehension and production of language from Study 2, we found no sig-
 nificant correlations with gestures and only one significant, positive correla-
 tion for comprehension (between the AOE of attention following and the
 number of words comprehended at 10 months). For word production, how-
 ever, there were several significant correlations between the AOE of attention
 following and the number of words produced from 12 to 24 months (five of
 the six correlations for these months were significant; r's ranged from -.36
 to -.38). Similarly, the AOE of communicative gestures (from Study 1) and
 the number of words produced from 12 to 24 months were also often signifi-
 cantly correlated (five of the six correlations for these months were signifi-
 cant; r's ranged from -.35 to -.43). Note that the negative value of these
 correlations actually has a positive meaning: the earlier infants displayed at-
 tention following and communicative gesture skills (the smaller the AOE),
 the more words they produced from 12 through 24 months.

 DISCUSSION

 As in Study 1, the age of emergence and developmental progression of
 the individual measures of this study were overall very similar to those fouind
 in other studies in which similar measurement procedures were used, with
 the possible exception of productive language. Thus, on average, there was
 a gradual increase over the period between 9 and 15 months in the amount
 of time that infants and their mothers spent in joint attentional engage-

 110

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 ment-an increase due mostly to increasing numbers of joint-engagement
 episodes of similar duration (this contrasts to some degree with Bakeman &
 Adamson's, 1984, finding that episode duration increased during this time).
 In the 10-minute free-play session with their mothers, 60% of infants partici-
 pated in some joint engagement at q months, and all infants participated in
 some joint engagement by 11 months of age. These findings place the age
 of emergence of joint engagement a bit earlier than do those of Bakeman
 and Adamson (1984), but, as Figure 18 above illustrates, the general develop-
 mental trend is very similar in the two studies. We also found some marked
 individual differences (and not much intraindividual stability over time) in
 joint engagement across dyads: the ages at which infants consistently spent
 5% or more of their time in joint engagement (30 seconds) were spread
 across the entire age range of the study (9 months for three infants; between
 9 and 15 months for 15 infants; and, presumably, after 15 months for the
 remaining six infants).

 This pattern of interindividual differences and intraindividual differ-
 ences across time clearly indicates that the ability to engage in a particular
 kind of social interaction on one or a few occasions does not translate directly
 into large or stable quantities of that type of social interaction. Many variables
 come together to produce extended periods of mother-infant joint engage-
 ment, including mothers' skill at identifying and manipulating infants' focus
 of attention, infants' engagement with the objects available, and the particu-
 lar motivational predispositions of both mother and infant on a particular
 occasion.

 In terms of language skills, as measured by the MacArthur CDI, our sam-

 ple of infants was almost exactly at the 50th percentile in their production
 of gestures and comprehension of words, but in their production of words
 they were a bit later than most samples (e.g., Fenson et al., 1993). The reason
 for this is very likely the instructions that we gave mothers to count only words
 that infants used referentially and flexibly. Our rationale was that we were
 using very strict criteria for all the other social-cognitive skills and that our
 criteria for the communication measures should therefore likewise be strict
 (for a justification of this procedure, see also Tomasello & Mervis, 1994).
 Apparently, this procedure had its strongest effect on the production mea-
 sure, perhaps because it is easier to tell when an infant is producing a word
 in only one narrow context, whereas context-bound usage is more difficult
 to discern in the case of comprehension.

 The most important findings of this second study concern the strong
 positive relation between the amount of time that mother-infant dyads spent
 in joint attentional engagement and infants' very earliest skills of nonlinguis-
 tic and linguistic communication. With regard to production of gestures,
 mother-infant dyads who spent more time in joint engagement at 9 and 11
 months had infants with more gestures some months later, mostly between

 111

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 11 and 13 months (this was still true when maternal language was factored
 out). A similarly strong relation was found between joint engagement and
 word comprehension. Joint engagement in the middle months of the study
 (months 11-13) correlated positively with word comprehension at the same
 time and beyond, mostly between 11 and 15 months (this was still true when
 maternal language was factored out).

 The relation between joint engagement and language production was
 not as clear as that between joint engagement and the gesture and compre-
 hension measures. Initially, the only relation found was between joint engage-
 ment at 14 months and concurrent and later language production, including
 strong correlations with both 18- and 24-month productive vocabulary size.
 This suggests that the window of time in which joint engagement begins to
 influence language production opens at 14 months. The data at 15 months
 did not support this trend, however, as there were no significant correlations
 at 15 months. The reason for this very likely involves the fact that the joint-
 engagement measure was lower at this age than would be expected, reflecting
 some confluence of unusual events for the measurement of this variable at
 this age. In any case, when we employed a different procedure in which we
 considered, not infants' chronological age, but rather the age of their first
 significant amount of joint engagement (the "calibrated analyses"), strong
 correlations were found between joint engagement and language production.
 These findings suggest that the window of time in which joint engage-

 ment is associated with language production is specific, not to a particular
 age, but rather to a particular amount of time spent in joint engagement.
 They also reveal a significant measurement issue when the target of investiga-
 tion is the initial emergence of some skill or skills: there can be no overall
 correlation as long as the majority of the sample is still "on the floor," as was
 the case in the earliest months of the current study. In general, it is possible to
 obtain strong correlations in cases of initial developmental emergence only
 when the skills being correlated have both gotten started for the majority of
 infants-which is precisely the rationale for our calibrated analyses of lan-
 guage production.

 A related finding was that maternal language that followed into infants'

 focus of attention was related to infants' linguistic but not their gestural devel-
 opment. Maternal language that followed into the infants' attention did not
 relate in any significant way to the infants' gestural communication at any
 time between 9 and 15 months of age. On the other hand, maternal following
 language was consistently related to infants' concurrent and later comprehen-
 sion of language from the middle months of the study on: the more mothers
 used their language to follow into their infant's attention, the more words
 the infant comprehended at the same and later months (this was still true
 when time in joint engagement was factored out). In terms of language pro-
 duction, maternal following language used at 9 months related to infants'

 112

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 later production at 13-15 months (this was still true when time in joint en-
 gagement was factored out). However, the predictive value of maternal
 following language in the current study did not continue after 15 months,
 suggesting that adults' following into children's attentional focus is most ben-
 eficial at younger ages, when children are less skilled at following into and
 directing the attention of others (see also Smith et al., 1988; Tomasello, in
 press).

 It should be noted that, in the current study, we did not find that mater-
 nal language used to redirect the infant's attentional focus (often called mater-
 nal directiveness) correlated consistently negatively with infant language, as has
 been found by other researchers (e.g., Dunham et al., 1993; Tomasello &
 Farrar, 1986a) -although we did find a fairly large number of nonsignificant
 negative correlations. However, recall that Akhtar et al. (1991), using the
 same coding scheme as the current study, did not find significant correlations
 between total maternal leading language and vocabulary size; only a subset
 of leading language, attention directives, significantly predicted a smaller vo-
 cabulary. Perhaps one other issue is that we used total number of leading
 utterances, whereas some previous studies have used proportions of utter-
 ances, thus factoring out any positive effects of total amount of maternal lan-
 guage.

 When joint engagement and maternal following language were used in

 concert to predict infants' early language skills, a very large amount of the
 variance was accounted for. In predicting word comprehension and word pro-
 duction (using the calibrated analyses), approximately 50% of the variance
 was accounted for in several different cases. This is noteworthy because lan-
 guage development depends on a number of factors not measured at all in
 this study that presumably contribute as well. Most notably, there was no mea-
 sure of vocal-auditory processing, clearly a key skill in language acquisition,
 or of the ability to categorize, also a key skill in learning the referential exten-
 sions of words (Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1987). We thus think that accounting
 for over half the variance in some cases with basically two measures of social
 interaction-one of the tendency of mother-infant dyads to enter into joint
 attentional engagement and one of mothers' tendency to use language to
 follow into their infant's attentional focus-is an amazing outcome.

 The current study is thus the first to establish a relation between joint

 engagement, maternal language, and children's communicative competence
 during the initial stages of communicative development. This is important
 for a number of reasons, the more theoretical of which will be discussed in
 Chapter V below. For now, the important point is a methodological one. Di-
 rection of influence has always been an issue in studies of the relation be-
 tween joint attentional engagement and language since children's ability to
 communicate with language (as well as through other means) is obviously an
 important factor in their ability to establish and maintain joint attentional

 113

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 engagement with adults (Tomasello, 1988). Indeed, the child's use of a piece
 of language during joint focus with the adult is used by most researchers as
 an indicator, equivalent to a look to the adult's face, of the child's apprecia-
 tion that the adult is actively participating in the interaction-raising the con-
 cern that the measures of joint engagement and language are not truly inde-
 pendent.

 The point is that, in our study, the strongest correlations of joint engage-

 ment were with language comprehension-which was not correlated with lan-
 guage production-which obviates the methodological concern that an in-
 fant who talks more provides researchers with more opportunities to establish
 that the infant and the adult are jointly focused on something. In general,
 our argument (following Tomasello, 1988, 1992) is that the causality involved
 in the current study is transactional: as adult and infant become better able
 and more motivated to enter into extended periods of joint engagement, the
 infant's communicative skills become more sophisticated, and, as those skills
 become more sophisticated, the dyad is better able to establish and maintain
 extended periods of joint engagement-which leads to the acquisition of
 more new language, and so on, across time. However, we also believe that
 the current study has established that the first step in this process is when
 adult and infant begin to enter into periods of nonlinguistic joint engage-
 ment, which gets the process moving initially.

 With regard to future studies of relations between joint engagement and
 communication, it is important to extend the age range for some of the mea-
 sures, although more important than the actual age range may be the stage
 of language development of the children. Measurement of joint engagement
 beginning at the age of children's first words and continuing past the age of
 their vocabulary spurt may be most illuminating. This period may reveal a
 changing relation between joint engagement and language development
 before and after the understanding of referentiality. It is also important
 to increase the specificity of the measures. For example, an ideal measure
 of gestures would include a greater variety than that measured here and
 should include symbolic, or representational, gestures as these are thought
 to emerge within the context of joint engagement, much like first words
 (Acredolo & Goodwyn, 1988). In addition, vocabularies should be examined
 by types of words (e.g., nominals vs. other types). Perhaps calibration ofjoint-
 engagement and production data to the onset of referential language, as mea-
 sured by first nominal production or onset of vocabulary spurt, would reveal
 a pattern or amount of joint engagement that consistently precedes the use
 of referential language.

 There is also a need to study the relation between joint engagement and

 language in a variety of contextual and cultural settings as this relation ap-
 pears to be highly sensitive to situational demands. Studies almost exclusively
 have observed the mother and child in an uninterrupted free-play situation

 114

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 without the distractions that typify the daily routines of the mother and child
 at home. The presence of other children, such as siblings in the home or a
 group of children in a day-care setting, reduces the amount of undivided
 attention that a mother or a caregiver can devote to any one child, and it
 also affects the style of interaction; for example, when caring for more than
 one child, a caregiver's speech is more directive than when caring for a single
 child (Schaffer & Liddell, 1984; Tomasello et al., 1986). Thus, findings from
 mother-child free play in laboratory settings may not generalize as robustly
 as might be hoped to other settings found in the home or day-care center.
 We will briefly address the issue of other cultures in Chapter V below.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 115

 V. GENERAL DISCUSSION

 In the current study, we have attempted to investigate young children's
 earliest social-cognitive skills in two ways: (a) from the perspective of early
 social cognition as infants first learn to tune in to adults and to get adults to
 tune in to them in individual behavioral acts and (b) from the point of view
 of communication and language as infants begin to acquire the conventional
 communicative signals and symbols of their cultures in relatively extended
 periods of joint attentional engagement with adults. These two perspectives
 were taken simultaneously on the same group of 24 infants, longitudinally
 from 9 to 15 months of age at monthly intervals, and thus the current study
 represents the most broadly based investigation to date of infants' earliest
 skills of social cognition and communication. Because we observed a wider
 range of behaviors and processes than previous studies, and because we ob-
 served those behaviors and processes at more closely spaced longitudinal
 intervals than many studies, we were able to document in some detail the
 various developmental interrelations among these fundamentally important
 skills.

 In this general discussion, we first review the main findings of our investi-
 gation. We then discuss some of the important theoretical implications of
 these findings for theories of social-cognitive development and the early ac-
 quisition of communicative competence. We conclude with a brief discussion
 of the ways in which infants' emerging skills of social cognition enable them,
 early in the second year of life, to become fully active and contributing partici-
 pants in the cultural and communicative practices into which they are born.

 SUMMARY OF THE MAIN FINDINGS

 The main findings from our current sample of 24 American middle-class
 infants from 9 to 15 months of age, across both studies, may be summarized
 as follows:

 1. The age of emergence and developmental progression of each of the individual

 116

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 social-cognitive and communicative skills were for the most part comparable to those
 found in previous studies using similar operational definitions, procedures, and scoring
 criteria. As a whole, our findings strongly support the generally held view that
 the age period from 9 to 12 months is a crucially important one in the emer-
 gence of infants' initial skills of social cognition and communication, with
 the acquisition of language skills (in either comprehension or production)
 following closely behind. The majority of our infants displayed all the skills
 that we measured, with the exception of productive language, by 12 months
 of age-despite the fact that we took great pains to devise stringent criteria
 that, in our view, ensured that children really understood the intentions or
 attention of their social partner for each skill measured.

 2. The most common order of emergence of the five major social-cognitive and
 communicative skills measured was: joint engagement -> communicative gestures -
 attention following -> imitative learning ->referential language. This was true on
 average as well as on the level of individual infants, as almost two-thirds of
 the infants followed this exact pattern of emergence and over 80% followed
 it when attention following and imitative learning are allowed to alternate
 (since both involve following into the attention/behavior of others). The two
 object-related skills measured-object permanence and spatial relations-
 did not fit into this sequence in a consistent way across infants. When we look
 at individual tasks and their requirements, we may reconfigure this sequence
 slightly into the theoretically more meaningful sequence share attention ->
 follow attention/behavior --- direct attention/behavior. To share attention,
 infants simply look to the adult's face (check for the adult's attention) when
 the two of them are interacting in relatively close proximity with an object;
 to follow or direct attention/behavior, infants must take into account pre-
 cisely what the adult is attending to, or needs to attend to, in relatively distal
 space.

 3. These social-cognitive and communicative skills intercorrelated positively,
 although in some cases only at moderate levels and only when individual tasks
 were considered. Significant positive correlations were found between the ages
 of emergence of each pair of the main social-cognitive skills or one of
 their constituent tasks (with the exception of joint engagement, which had
 emerged for all infants by 9 months at the beginning of the study and there-
 fore had no variation). These correlations were found even though the skills
 emerged in a relatively rapid manner for most infants (almost 60% in 3
 months or less and almost 80% in 4 months or less), thus creating little vari-
 ability that could be correlated.

 4. On average, there was a gradual increase over the period between 9 and 15
 months in the amount of time that infants and their mothers spent in joint attentional
 engagement, but there were marked individual differences (and not much intraindivid-
 ual stability over time) in this pattern. This pattern of interindividual and intrain-
 dividual differences clearly indicates that the child's possession of a certain

 117

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 social-cognitive skill does not translate directly into large or stable quantities
 of particular types of social interaction. Many variables, many of them mainly
 due to the adult partner, must come together to enable infants to participate
 in extended periods of adult-child joint attentional engagement.

 5. The amount of time that mother-infant dyads spent in joint attentional engage-

 ment was reliably related to infants' very earliest skills of nonlinguistic and linguistic
 communication. The relation between joint engagement and gesture produc-
 tion was strongest at the earliest months when gestures were first emerging,
 the relation between joint engagement and language comprehension was
 strongest during the middle months when the comprehension of language
 was first emerging, and the relation between joint engagement and language
 production was strongest during the later months when language production
 was first emerging-beginning in those months in which individual infants
 had significant amounts of joint engagement with their mothers.

 6. Maternal language that followed into infants'focus of attention was related to
 the infants' linguistic but not to their gestural development. No aspects of maternal
 language related significantly to the infants' gestural communication at any
 time between 9 and 15 months of age. On the other hand, maternal language
 that followed into children's already-established attentional focus was consis-
 tently related to infants' comprehension and production of language during
 the middle months of the study, with weaker relations later in the study. This
 weakening of the relation presumably comes about because children become
 better able to determine adults' focus of attention more reliably, even when
 it is discrepant with their own, at older ages. Maternal following language
 combined with the joint-engagement measure to account for over half the
 variance in infants' linguistic competence at several time periods.

 These results have important implications for our understanding of chil-
 dren's early social cognition, for our understanding of children's nascent
 skills of gestural communication and language, and, in general, for our un-
 derstanding of the process by which children become fully participating mem-
 bers of cultures. We discuss these points each in turn.

 INFANT SOCIAL COGNITION

 The major theoretical hypothesis motivating the current study was that
 the different social-cognitive skills in late infancy that have been of central
 concern to many recent investigators are all manifestations of infants' emerg-
 ing understanding of other persons as intentional agents whose attention and
 behavior to outside objects and events may be shared, followed into, and di-
 rected in various ways (Tomasello, 1995a; Tomasello, Kruger, & Ratner,
 1993). This view does not imply that understanding others as intentional

 118

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 agents is an all-or-nothing affair, all infants' interactions with others being
 totally transformed instantaneously-in a stage-like fashion, for example.
 Much more compatible with the current view are such ideas as Bates's (1979)
 "homology through shared origins," in which a new cognitive competence
 becomes manifest in particular behaviors at different developmental periods
 depending on a number of context-specific factors, and Fisher and Silvern's
 (1985) notion that new levels of cognition do not by themselves determine
 particular behavioral skills but merely open possibilities that still must be indi-
 vidually worked out through behavioral interactions with different environ-
 ments in different contexts.

 Our view of early social cognition contrasts sharply with the two other

 currently influential views in which these different skills are seen as develop-
 mentally unrelated or at least not dependent on a new form of social under-
 standing. First, Baron-Cohen (1993, 1995) has proposed that infants' social
 cognition during the first 2 years of life is composed of three "mind-reading"
 mechanisms/modules, each of which has its own developmental timetable.
 These are an intention detector, an eye direction detector, and a shared at-
 tention mechanism. Part of the evidence for positing the modularity of these
 mechanisms is that, according to Baron-Cohen, they emerge at different ages
 (he also invokes other evidence, such as patterns of breakdown in children
 with atypical cognitive profiles).

 First, Baron-Cohen claims that children detect the intentions of others

 at least by 6 months of age. However, recent research by Gergely and his
 colleagues (Gergely et al., 1995; Csibra et al., in press), using habituation
 techniques, has found that 9- and 12-month-old infants, but not 6-month-
 old infants, take the intentional stance toward inanimate objects that are mov-
 ing with respect to one another in particular ways. Research on children's
 more natural behaviors-such as those investigated in our Study 1 and others
 reviewed above-provides no more evidence that 6-month-olds are capable
 of intention detection. Second, Baron-Cohen claims that 6-month-old infants
 also follow the gaze of other persons (detect their eye gaze direction). How-
 ever, recent research by Corkum and Moore (1995), along with our results
 in Study 1, indicates that a more realistic age (when all the appropriate exper-
 imental controls are in place) is 10-12 months (although the recent results
 of D'Entremont et al., 1997, provide still another age). Third, Baron-Cohen
 claims that it is not until 14 months of age that infants know that they are
 sharing attention with a social partner. However, the current results demon-
 strate that 9-month-old infants can enter into joint engagement with others
 (we found this for all 24 of our 9-month-olds in the hour-long session) and
 that, by 10-11 months, they can even actively show objects to others in a
 ritualized manner. Our view is thus that Baron-Cohen's ages of emergence
 are not correct in any of these three cases. If more accurate ages of emer-

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 119

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 gence are used, there is a strong developmental synchrony among these dif-
 ferent social-cognitive skills-with the relatively small decalages among them
 to be explained below.

 The other main view is that of Moore and his colleagues (Barresi &
 Moore, 1993, 1996; Corkum & Moore, 1995; Moore, 1996; Moore & Corkum,
 1994). Moore does not believe that what is happening at 9-12 months of age
 reflects a new understanding of other persons; rather, he argues that it is
 only at 18 months of age that infants truly understand others as intentional
 agents (an argument based on such things as their ability to recognize them-
 selves in mirrors and their more skillful use of language). According to Moore
 and his colleagues, the behaviors that we have observed in this study are in-
 deed the raw material out of which this understanding is constructed, but
 they themselves are independent behavioral skills each of which has its own
 critical stimuli, environmental contingencies, and learning history that do not
 depend on understanding others as intentional agents. To explain the devel-
 opmental synchrony and interrelatedness of the different social-cognitive
 skills, Moore invokes the emergence of a new information-processing ability
 to focus attention on two things simultaneously. But, to our knowledge, this
 information-processing ability has never been independently measured and
 related to early social cognition, and, indeed, our object-related tasks, which
 might be expected to depend to some degree on this same information-
 processing skill, did not fit well into the observed developmental sequence,
 and they correlated with the social-cognitive measures in only a sporadic
 manner.

 We nevertheless have some sympathy with Moore's view in the sense that

 each of the social-cognitive skills that we have observed does indeed require
 some specific learning experiences. For example, it is almost surely the case
 that, if infants were prevented from observing others look at things from birth
 to 18 months of age, they would not follow the gaze of others on first expo-
 sure at that time and that, if they were prevented from experiencing others
 communicating with them linguistically during this period, they would not
 immediately communicate with others linguistically at 18 months. But the fact
 that joint engagement, attention following, imitative learning, and communi-
 cative gestures all emerge for most infants during a very brief developmental
 window and in a correlated fashion-with the consistent developmental or-
 dering among these skills having a theoretically coherent explanation (see
 below) and with the object-related skills not fitting well into this picture-is
 best explained, in our view, by invoking some specifically social developments
 that open up new interactional possibilities.

 We thus believe that the current results accord best with our hypothesis

 of the shared origins of all these different skills of social cognition from chil-
 dren's emerging understanding of other persons as intentional agents. The
 idea is simply that the different behaviors and skills that fall under the general

 120

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 rubric of early social cognition, joint attention, and communication all in-
 volve social interaction with other persons. If the way that infants understand
 other persons changes, all these behaviors and skills are likely to be affected
 as well--just as a new understanding of objects is likely to show itself in all
 infants' interactions with physical objects. The current studies provide strong
 evidence for this view by demonstrating that the changes that occur in a num-
 ber of theoretically interrelated behaviors and skills at the end of the first
 year take place in a relatively brief developmental period, are correlated, and
 are all of the same basic type. Each of the changes basically transforms a social
 interaction that was previously dyadic, between child and adult, into one that
 is triadic in the sense that the child incorporates into the interaction an un-
 derstanding of the adult's intentions and attention toward external entities
 (perhaps including the self; Tomasello, 1996b).

 The developmental ordering of the different behavioral manifestations
 of this new social understanding has a fairly straightforward explanation. The
 basic idea is that, in social cognition, we may first understand that others have
 some kind of psychological stance that is different from our own without
 knowing precisely what that stance is or how to go about identifying it; only
 later do we acquire means for determining the specific content of the psycho-
 logical stances of others. This distinction is similar in spirit to that of Flavell
 (1992) between Level 1 and Level 2 perspective taking as manifest in chil-
 dren's understanding of visual perception (see also Flavell & Miller, 1998).
 But, since it deals with the understanding of the psychological relations of
 others to outside entities more generally, we will simply refer to the first level
 of understanding as "understanding that" others have psychological relations
 to the world and to the second level of understanding as "understanding
 what" particular contentful psychological relation obtains in a particular case.

 Thus, the most basic level (understanding that) is an understanding that

 others attend to and have intentions toward outside entities. It is this level
 of understanding that underlies the skills that emerged earliest in the current
 study (on average 9-101/2h months): joint engagement, proximal declarative
 gestures (shows), and checking others' facial expressions in the social obsta-
 cle task. What is characteristic of these three behaviors is that they all consist
 almost entirely of a look to the face of the other person: either spontaneously
 in play (joint engagement), or when holding up an object (showing), or
 when the other person has intervened in a behavioral sequence (blocking
 and teasing).

 It is very difficult to determine what the infants understand of the other
 person's specific intentions or attention from these interactions (i.e., their
 content) because in all cases they are simply looking up to the adult's face.
 Indeed, with respect to showing, we have come to believe, on the basis of the
 many show gestures that we saw from infants who did not do such things as
 follow adult gaze, that, when infants of 9 and 10 months hold up objects and

 121

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 look to the face of the adult, they expect that the adult already is looking-
 just as they do when they look up in joint-engagement sequences. This is
 suggested by the fact that, when infants show objects to others, they generally
 do so in close social interactions by bringing them into a space between them-
 selves and the adult, with no change of gaze direction on the part of the
 adult either expected or needed.

 Overall, then, following G6mez et al. (1993) and others, we believe that

 the fact that infants look to others' faces in these early interactions, and not
 to their hands or somewhere else, clearly indicates that they understand that
 other persons are psychological beings or, perhaps, intentional agents. But
 infants do not show any ability at this early age to follow into or direct the
 specific psychological orientations of other persons to specific objects and
 events.

 As infants look to adults to check for their attention and intentions, it

 must happen often that the adult is focused or directed elsewhere. The sec-
 ond level of understanding (understanding what) thus reflects infants' at-
 tempts to determine what the adult is actually focused on or directed to-
 given that it is not what she herself is focused on or directed to. Infants thus
 seek to identify adults' specific behavioral intentions to change the state of
 the world in some specific way (i.e., their goals) and their specific perceptual
 intention to attend to some things, but not others, in the ambient environ-
 ment (if, following Gibson & Rader, 1979, attention may be thought of as a
 kind of intentional perception). Once infants possess this level of understand-
 ing, they may then begin to follow into the specific focus of attention and
 behavioral intentions of others and, ultimately, to attempt to manipulate or
 influence those specific psychological states.

 It is this level of understanding that underlies the kind of attention fol-

 lowing, imitative learning, and distal communicative acts (both gestural and
 linguistic) that emerged in our children after 111/2 months of age. It should
 be noted that all these later behaviors involve infants detecting adults' psycho-
 logical relations to entities that are located in more distal space, as compared
 with the more proximal space involved in the earlier joint attentional behav-
 iors. The distinction between proximal and distal joint attentional behaviors
 is thus also an important one and may explain the developmental sequence
 that we observed as well. But, in our view, the proximal-distal distinction is
 simply one aspect of our distinction between understanding the that and the
 what of others' intentional states, in the sense that understanding what some-
 one else is attending to necessarily involves following that individual outside
 the current cocoon of shared proximal attention.

 Within the what level of understanding, we found that infants' ability to

 follow into the attention and intentions of others emerged before their ability
 to direct the attention and intentions of others in acts of intentional com-

 122

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 munication toward distal entities, either gesturally or linguistically. Thus, on
 average, infants were first able to follow into the attention and behavior of
 others-via either gaze following or point following for attention and via imi-
 tative learning of either instrumental or arbitrary actions for behavior-be-
 tween 11 and 12 months of age. On the other hand, they were first able to
 use distal gestures such as pointing to direct the adult's attention to some-
 thing new-either imperatively or declaratively--only 1 month later, on aver-
 age, between 12 and 13 months of age. In a sense, acquiring the productive
 use of linguistic symbols-which emerged in our sample several months
 later-requires all these skills; that is, it requires the ability to follow into the
 adult's attention as she uses a word and the ability imitatively to learn to use
 that word to direct the attention of others in specific ways. Indeed, the main
 advantage of language over gestures from a communicative point of view is
 precisely the level of specificity that it allows in directing the attention of
 others.

 It is not clear how seriously to take this observed developmental se-

 quence of attention/behavior following preceding attention/behavior direct-
 ing within the what level of infant social understanding. One way to view it
 is as a kind of comprehension versus production question, and comprehen-
 sion is well known to precede production in many domains of cognitive and
 communicative development. However, in some cases, this may not hold.
 Thus, some infants may actually point to distal entities before they follow the
 gaze or pointing of others to distal entities. The logical question is how they
 could do this: How could infants point to direct the attention of another
 person when they do not seem to comprehend that the other has attentional
 states that they may follow into?

 The answer, we believe, is as follows. As Moore (1996) has argued, infants

 do indeed need to learn specific behavioral skills in specific behavioral con-
 texts. In the months around their first birthdays, this may be done either with
 or without an understanding of others as intentional agents. This difference
 is manifest in the type of learning process involved, of which there are two.
 First, infants may behave for their own reasons and, owing to the reactions
 of others, have that behavior "socialized" in the sense that they come to see
 its social effects. This is a mechanism (proposed by Kaye, 1982, and Vygotsky,
 1978) in which, in a sense, production precedes comprehension. Thus, an
 infant may extend her index finger toward an object as a kind of self-direct-
 ing behavior, but, when adults repeatedly respond by either fetching the ob-
 ject or otherwise attending to it, the infant may learn that her index finger
 extension leads to some predictable social results. Initially, this may be accom-
 plished without an understanding of others as intentional agents, in much the
 manner Moore (1996) proposes. This is essentially the learning mechanism
 dubbed "ontogenetic ritualization" by Tomasello (1990, 1994), and it ac-

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 123

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 counts for infants' acquisition of many gesture productions (e.g., hands over
 head to be picked up) as well as the gesture productions of at least some
 nonhuman primates (Tomasello & Camaioni, 1997).

 On the other hand, infants may learn a new social behavior or skill by
 observing the intentional actions of others and going through a process of
 imitative learning in which they understand that, for example, Mom is trying
 to get Dad to look over there by pointing toward that location and that, if I
 have the same goal, I can use that same behavioral means (the same applies
 to such things as infants watching someone trying to open a box using a key
 and understanding that, when they have the same goal, they can use the same
 means). The point is that this kind of imitative learning (one form of cultural
 learning; Tomasello, Kruger, & Ratner, 1993) requires that the infant under-
 stand something of the intentions and attention of others, especially the fact
 that the behavior of others may be partitioned into ends (goals) and behav-
 ioral means. The current results are that, before their first birthdays, infants
 are able to engage in this kind of imitative learning in at least some instances,
 including the imitative learning of linguistic symbols, which, because of their
 conventional nature, can be learned only by means of imitation. When this
 form of imitative learning is involved, it is fair to say that attention following
 (comprehension) precedes attention directing (production).

 We are aware of very little evidence that speaks directly to the question
 of which of these two processes might be at work in specific cases, and, in-
 deed, we believe that infants' gestures such as pointing may potentially be
 learned in either of these ways. In some cases, infants may even learn a ges-
 ture by ritualization and then, at some later point, come to understand the
 correspondence between their own gesture and that of other persons-thus
 transforming it, belatedly, into a shared communicative convention. Our view
 of the ordering of attention following and attention directing within the what
 level, then, is that there may be some variability depending on the specific
 ontogenetic histories of specific individuals.

 Finally, we may ask the question of where this new understanding of

 other persons comes from ontogenetically. Some would claim that it is innate
 and present from birth and that it is only the infant's skills of behavioral
 expression that develop (e.g., Trevarthen, 1979b). We believe that there is
 social-cognitive development involved, however, and that there are two key
 developmental precursors: (a) infants' ability to identify with others-to per-
 ceive others as "like me"-and (b) infants' experience of their own inten-
 tionality. These must come together for infants to understand that other per-
 sons are intentional agents who experience the world in ways similar to the
 ways in which they themselves do.

 With regard to the first precursor, Meltzoff and Gopnik (1993) argue

 that the infant's identification with others is present in nascent form from
 birth, as evinced by neonatal mimicking or imitation. From the very begin-

 124

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 ning, infants identify with and imitate others-and know when others are
 imitating them-so that their growing understanding of others is applied to
 themselves and, conversely, their knowledge of themselves is applied to others
 (see also Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1993). On the other hand, citing Anisfeld's
 (1991) skeptical review of neonatal imitation research, Barresi and Moore
 (1996) believe that a certain type of social experience is necessary for chil-
 dren to learn the kind of self-other correspondences that Meltzoff and Gop-
 nik posit as innate. Key in Barresi and Moore's account are situations in which
 adult and infant take similar intentional stances toward an outside entity and
 the infant attends to this convergence; for example, they both look to the
 same place or fear the same object. It is in such interactions, and only in
 such interactions, that children have available both first-person information
 about their own intentional states and third-person information about the
 intentional states of the other (e.g., through their facial expressions and be-
 havior) simultaneously. Through these kinds of convergence experiences in-
 fants come both to identify and to differentiate first- and third-person per-
 spectives in much the same way as they come to differentiate and coordinate
 their sensorimotor schemes from the world in general.

 The problem is that neither of these theories of how infants come to
 identify with others is very specific about how their understanding of others
 develops and changes, and this brings us to the second precursor concerning
 intentionality. In this connection, there is one very important developmental
 fact that has not typically been connected with infants' social cognition: at
 around 8-9 months of age, infants for the first time differentiate in their own
 behavior between the ends and the means of instrumental acts; that is, they
 begin to behave in ways that are clearly intentional. In Piaget's (1952) fc mu-
 lation, infants begin down this path when they begin removing obstacles and
 performing other acts whose function it is to enable other acts (see also Frye,
 1991, and the current findings with regard tv the physical obstacle task). Such
 hierarchically organized behavior indicates the infant's understanding of the
 relativity of means and ends-that an activity that is an end in one context
 may be a means in another. The essential point is that this dissociation of
 means and ends enables infants to formulate a goal independently of and
 prior to actually acting, and thus this new mode of behavior is the child's
 first experience with a mental entity (i.e., a goal) that is at least somewhat
 independent of direct sensorimotor action.

 It is not an accident, we would argue, that, very soon after infants begin
 behaving in this clearly intentional way (i.e., at 8-9 months), they begin
 seeing the behavior of others as intentional as well, as evinced by the findings
 of many studies, including the current one. Our proposal is thus that it is in
 their own intentional behavior that infants first experience intentionality
 as they formulate independent goals and then act on them, either attaining
 them or not. This experience then provides the basis for an understanding

 125

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 that others also act intentionally in this same way. Exactly how it does so is
 not clear at this time, but it is obviously based in some way on the first precur-
 sor: infants' previous identification with other persons in the months leading
 up to this new development (by either the Meltzoff-Gopnik or the Barresi-
 Moore developmental pathway). In either case, the proposal is that children's
 knowledge of their own behavior-from the inside as it were-is the impetus
 for new levels in the understanding of the behavior of others (for a defense
 of this view in the form of simulation theory, see Gordon, 1986, 1992). Al-
 though we have not focused on the role of emotions in all this, one hypothe-
 sis might be that children do this most readily with respect to shared emo-
 tions and thus that social referencing (which we did not assess in the
 current study) might be the leading edge of the transition from understand-
 ing the self's psychological states to understanding the psychological states
 of others.

 To make this a complete account of children's social-cognitive develop-

 ment, it would have to be extended to children's understanding of the
 thoughts and beliefs of others, what we have called the understanding of mental
 agents, sometime in their fourth year of life (Tomasello, Kruger, & Ratner,
 1993). The idea would have to be that children come to understand first that
 their own beliefs are sometimes different from the way things "really" are,
 and this understanding could then be extended to others. Although we do
 not know the basis for the initial discovery at this time, in our view it is likely
 that the raw material for this discovery is the kind of conflicting conceptual
 perspectives that are the stuff of linguistic interaction and discourse in the
 second and third years of life (see Harris, 1996).

 THE EMERGENCE OF LANGUAGE

 The study of language acquisition has been very much influenced by
 formal linguistic models that are fundamentally inimical to analyses focused
 on psychological process (Tomasello, 1995b). In opposition to this view, and
 following the general hypothesis of the current study, our view is that chil-
 dren's initial skills of linguistic communication are a natural outgrowth of
 their emerging understanding of other persons as intentional agents-given
 that they regularly experience adults using a set of linguistic conventions
 (each with its own cultural history) to communicate both with them and with
 other people. Perhaps surprisingly, language is seldom considered in the con-
 text of children's other skills of social cognition, but our view is that, when
 language is viewed as a set of social conventions whose primary function is
 to enable one person to manipulate the attention of other persons in very
 specific ways, the use of language for purposes of communication is perhaps
 the most powerful social-cognitive skill that young children are acquiring in

 126

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 their second year of life and beyond. This may be called the social-pragmatic
 view of language acquisition.

 There are two main views of early language development that are in op-
 position to our view of linguistic communication as fundamentally a skill of
 social cognition. First is the view that the structure of language is innate and
 highly modularized. Although different nativistic theories are concerned with
 different aspects of language structure, there are some views in which chil-
 dren have a priori knowledge of even the most elementary aspects of lan-
 guage from the beginning. This knowledge emanates from the language mod-
 ule, which has its own developmental timetable (for a broad summary of
 some of these views, see Pinker, 1994). Although many nativists confine their
 hypotheses to syntax and the more abstract aspects of language, other theo-
 rists have attempted to extend this general line of reasoning to more basic
 aspects of linguistic competence. For example, some theorists recognize that
 much of language is acquired through individual acts of learning, but they
 still contend that infants have a head start on the process by having some
 kind of built-in "constraints" that guide, for example, their initial hypotheses
 about the meanings of words (e.g., Markman, 1989, 1992).

 The most obvious question for this view in the current context is why

 language emerges directly on the heels of the dawning of many of children's
 other skills of social cognition and communication. A reasonable response
 might be that many things emerge in children's development during this
 same age period. But then the question becomes why the emergence of lan-
 guage is correlated with the emergence of these other skills of social cogni-
 tion, as found by many other studies as well as this one (e.g., Bates, 1979)-
 perhaps especially the tight intercorrelation of early language skills with skills
 of joint attentional engagement. Experimental studies in which children use
 social-pragmatic cues to learn new words also support this view (for a review,
 see Tomasello, in press).

 The other opposing view is one in which language is viewed as just an-

 other learned behavior, with the acquisition of language depending on noth-
 ing other than very general skills of perception, memory, and learning. Thus,
 in a recent paper, Smith (1995; see also Smith & Samuelson, 1997) argues
 that word learning takes place as children associate words with whatever is
 most salient to their attention in the general situational context, with lan-
 guage structure emerging from complex and dynamic developmental pro-
 cesses (there have also been a variety of prior behavioristic approaches in the
 same spirit, but with less sophisticated theories of development). This is a
 reasonable view that has the advantage of highlighting the individual learning
 processes that are clearly an integral part of the language-acquisition process.
 But the question again in this case is why linguistic skills emerge when they
 do, correlated with other skills of social cognition. Perhaps there is some gen-
 eral process explanation in terms of different subskills maturing or the like,

 127

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 but our view is that a new element is needed. The new element that is needed
 is children's newly emerging ability to understand other persons as individu-
 als "like me" who have psychological relations to the world that can be
 shared, followed into, and manipulated with both gestures and language.

 Language acquisition is a very complex phenomenon, and we can pro-

 vide here only very brief characterizations (perhaps caricatures) of two ap-
 proaches to language acquisition that do not consider language as primarily
 a manifestation of social-cognitive skills. But we would like to be very clear
 about one thing. The social-pragmatic view of language acquisition is some-
 times characterized as focusing on the influences of the social environment
 on language. We are not arguing here for the influence of social factors on
 language acquisition-for example, the role of "input" or the influence of
 social setting-important though these may be. What we are doing is making
 the stronger claim that language is a social skill, not some separate entity to
 be influenced by social factors (Tomasello, 1992). As such, language should
 be considered as just another social skill, like the others that we have investi-
 gated in the current two studies. This is perhaps clearest when we consider
 what a linguistic symbol is in psychological terms and how children might go
 about acquiring one.

 Suppose the following: an adult addresses a novel expression to a child,
 perhaps while pointing to an interesting event, for example, "A tractor!" For
 a child to understand this novel expression, she must understand that the
 adult is making this unfamiliar noise in an effort to get her to focus her atten-
 tion on some aspect of the ongoing event; that is, she must understand that
 the adult has intentions toward her attentional state. We may thus describe
 the social situation as the adult focusing on some aspect of an ongoing event
 and then attempting to get the child to do the same. For her part, the child
 must have some way of understanding that this is what the adult is trying to
 do without relying on the new linguistic expression tractor-which she, by
 stipulation, does not yet comprehend. To achieve this understanding, she
 may use her knowledge of the adult's likely focus of attention in such situa-
 tions, her understanding of adult gestures, her knowledge of the surrounding
 language that she does understand, or anything else in the situation that
 might help her zero in on the adult's communicative intention.
 Once the child does understand the adult's communicative intention in

 using the new expression tractor, a symbol is created when she then acquires
 appropriate use of the expression herself. That is, as in all types of cul-
 tural learning, the process is something like the following: (a) the child un-
 derstands that the adult's intention is for her to focus on the tractor, and
 (b) she also realizes that when she wishes to do as the adult is doing-when
 she wishes to focus someone else's attention on the tractor-she may use this
 same means of expression. There is thus a role reversal in cultural learning

 128

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 as the child identifies with the adult and adopts the adult's behavioral strategy
 for this specific function. As the child does this, she retains her understanding
 that the adult also comprehends and uses this same linguistic expression. The
 child's use of the expression thus creates a communicative convention, or sym-
 bol, whose essence is its intersubjectivity: the child simultaneously produces
 the symbol and appreciates that the recipient comprehends the symbol. We
 may thus think of this bidirectionality of linguistic symbols as simply the qual-
 ity of being socially "shared" (Akhtar & Tomasello, in press; Tomasello, in
 press).

 In terms of the two levels of social understanding that we have already
 posited-a that level in which infants recognize that other persons have inten-
 tions and attention toward the world and a what level in which they begin to
 determine precisely what those intentions and attention are-we believe that
 the what level is necessary for language acquisition. That is, simply under-
 standing that another person may have a psychological relation to the world
 is not enough to acquire linguistic symbols, whose function is to pick out a
 very specific entity or aspect of a situation. Our prediction is thus that, at the
 first level, at 9 or 10 months, infants can do only something very basic, like
 look up to another or hold up an object to another who is already looking.
 They cannot direct the attention of others to particular locations and entities,
 either gesturally or linguistically, or follow others' attention to particular enti-
 ties because they do not understand that they can share with others aspects
 of the world with such specificity. A corollary of this view is that the skills of
 linguistic comprehension that some infants seem to show at 9-10 months of
 age are not of the same nature as their later linguistic skills in that they are
 not intersubjective in the same way. They are more associatively based and
 resemble in fundamental structure the skills possessed by household pets who
 comprehend such linguistic expressions as "Dinner" and "Go for a walk."
 But the what level of social-cognitive understanding of intentional agents
 is not by itself sufficient for the acquisition of a language; learners must also
 be exposed to particular linguistic conventions. That is, although many ges-
 tural skills might develop from general social interactions alone, in which the
 infant directs the attention of the adult to something in their shared environ-
 ment, a language is a cultural artifact that has undergone many thousands
 of years of historical development. The acquisition of language can occur
 only when young children encounter other people using the communicative
 conventions of a particular language (given that they are in possession of the
 appropriate social-cognitive skills). Furthermore, it might be that, to acquire
 linguistic conventions at a very early age, say 12-13 months of age as was
 reported for some of the infants in our study and others, particular kinds of
 social environments and cultural routines may be required in which the
 adults' communicative intentions are made especially salient for children

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 129

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 (Tomasello, 1992). Indeed, we believe that this is precisely what we have
 shown here. Mother-infant dyads who knew how to enter into joint atten-
 tional engagement produced children with larger vocabularies, and, more-
 over, mothers following into their infant's immediate attentional focus was
 also associated with larger vocabularies for children. Both these relations held
 from as early as we could reliably measure the infants' language and social-
 cognitive skills.

 However, it may be that, later in their second year of life, children may
 go on to acquire linguistic symbols in a wide array of less user-friendly envi-
 ronments in which they have to work much harder to discern the adult's
 communicative intentions (Tomasello, in press). That is to say, the relations
 that we have found here between joint attentional engagement, maternal fol-
 lowing language, and children's language development may be especially rel-
 evant for-or perhaps even confined to-the earliest stages of language de-
 velopment, before children have found ways intersubjectively to enter into
 more complex social and communicative situations.

 Of special importance in this regard are reports of the language devel-

 opment of children in many non-Western societies (e.g., Scheffelin &
 Ochs 1986), who are not engaged in the same intensive way as Western
 children in joint-engagement interactions and whose mothers do not use
 their language to follow into the child's current attentional focus. Indeed,
 there are recent reports that children in some cultures seem to acquire lan-
 guage almost exclusively as they observe, from the outside as it were, third
 parties interacting with and talking to one another (Brown, in press)--in
 which case the kinds of joint attentional engagement processes that we have
 described here are not really operative. Nevertheless, in the current view,
 these children must have some way of establishing joint attention with others;
 it is just that they may have to use more sophisticated social-cognitive skills
 to do so. The process may thus unfold at a somewhat later age than in West-
 ern middle-class families-mostly in children's third year of life, for exam-
 ple-and, indeed, there is some initial evidence that this is the case (Brown,
 in press).

 The most general point is thus that language acquisition requires both
 specific social-cognitive skills on the part of the child and specific types of
 social interaction in which the child is exposed to the social conventions that
 constitute her native language. Our hypothesis is that children must reach
 the what level in the understanding of other persons as intentional agents
 before language acquisition can begin in earnest and that, at very early ages
 (12-14 months), they may require adults to scaffold the process by following
 into their already-established attentional focus. As children develop in their
 ability to identify the specific referents that adults intend when using new
 pieces of language, adult scaffolding may become unnecessary.

 130

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 THE HUMAN CAPACITY FOR CULTURE

 The cognitive skills that most clearly differentiate human beings from

 other animal species are those that allow them to take advantage of the knowl-
 edge and skills of conspecifics. It is not clear that human skills of spatial cogni-
 tion, for instance, are more sophisticated than those of other primates, in
 the absence of maps and compasses. It is not clear that human skills of mathe-
 matics would be so different from those of other primates in the absence of
 a symbol system for indicating numbers and skillful practitioners to teach
 novices. It is not clear that human skills of categorization would be so differ-
 ent from those of other primate species in the absence of language (Toma-
 sello & Call, 1997).

 What we have investigated in this Monograph are the social-cognitive skills
 that enable infants and young children to begin participating in the collectiv-
 ity of culture in an active way and thereby to amplify their cognitive skills by
 tuning in to others who have other skills. Certainly, young infants are cultural
 beings from the beginning in the sense that their development takes place
 within a particular cultural context that influences many aspects of their cog-
 nitive development (Kruger & Tomasello, 1996). But it is only with the emer-
 gence of the kinds of social-cognitive abilities that we have investigated here
 that they become able to tune in to other persons and their cognitive skills
 directed to outside entities, that is, in a way that fosters acquisition of the
 conventional use of cultural artifacts such as tools and language-which then
 serve to mediate their subsequent interactions with their environments in
 cognitively meaningful ways. This is the essence of the process of encultura-
 tion.

 Perhaps the most compelling evidence of the importance of early social-
 cognitive skills is the case of children with autism, who have many cognitive
 competencies but appear to be deficient in one way or another (with wide
 individual differences) in just the social-cognitive skills studied here. This
 means that they do not tune in to the knowledge and skills of others in the
 same way as normally developing children and that they do not therefore
 become enculturated in the same way either (again with very large individual
 differences; Baron-Cohen, 1993; Hobson, 1993).

 The uniqueness of the human adaptation for culture is also brought into
 stark relief when a comparison is made to our nearest primate relatives. Al-
 though there are population differences in the behavior of, for example, dif-
 ferent groups of chimpanzees, these primates may be said to have culture in
 only an extended sense of that term (Tomasello, 1994). The reason that they
 have not created cultures of the human kind is that it appears as though they
 do not understand their conspecifics as intentional agents like themselves
 who experience the world in ways similar to the ways in which they themselves

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 131

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 do. Thus, in their communication with conspecifics, apes do not point to
 distal entities in the environment, they do not hold up objects for others to
 see and share, and they do not actively give or offer objects to other individu-
 als. They also do not actively teach one another with any regularity, and the
 kinds of cooperation in which they engage are very simple and basic (i.e.,
 they very likely do not involve an understanding of the role of the other).
 Chimpanzees do not do these things because they do not have an understand-
 ing of their conspecifics as intentional agents whose mental lives they may
 affect through their own communicative, pedagogical, or cooperative efforts.
 This means that these apes will not be able, at least not in the manner of
 humans, to pool their cognitive resources and create cultural artifacts that
 all members of the group can exploit for cognitive purposes.

 Apes raised by humans in human-like cultural environments may be
 somewhat different. These "enculturated" apes develop some human-like
 skills that they do not develop in their natural habitats or under more typical
 captive conditions, for example, imperative pointing, some skills with lan-
 guage-like symbols, and some skills of imitative learning (for a review, see
 Call & Tomasello, 1996). But they do not thereby turn into human beings.
 For example, it is still a rare event for an enculturated ape to simply show
 something to a human or an ape companion or to point to something just
 for the sake of sharing attention to it (G6mez et al., 1993). Also, in tasks in
 which they must cooperate with conspecifics, their skills of collaborative
 learning are very limited as well, and there is still very little, if any, behavior
 of enculturated apes that qualifies as teaching. What is common to all these
 activities is that they are all motivated by a desire simply to share experience
 with others, without any immediate concrete goal, as demonstrated daily by
 human infants from around their first birthdays. This may be a uniquely hu-
 man motivation that not even human rearing can instill in nonhuman pri-
 mates.

 In conclusion, in the two studies reported here, we have provided evi-
 dence that, by their first birthdays, infants have begun to understand some
 aspects of the minds of other persons. At the very least, they understand that
 people attend to things of interest and behave intentionally toward them.
 This understanding manifests itself in a number of ways, for example, in at-
 tention following, intentional communication, and imitative learning. Under-
 standing others in this way is foundational for almost all the uniquely human
 aspects of cognition because it allows human infants and young children to
 begin making use of the knowledge, skills, and artifacts that others have cre-
 ated, perhaps especially language. In this way, young children may begin to
 amplify their own individual cognitive skills in a manner unique to the spe-
 cies-a manner that, sadly, seems to be unavailable to some atypically devel-
 oping children. This does not mean, of course, that later forms of social cog-

 132

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 nition such as understanding the thoughts and beliefs of others-"theory of
 mind"-are not also important. It is just that they are most appropriately
 conceived, in our view, as icing on the cake in the ontogeny of human social
 cognition. The origins of the species-unique aspects of human social cogni-
 tion lie in the kinds of simple acts that we have observed in the current studies
 in which infants share, follow into, and direct the attention and behavior of
 others.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 133

 APPENDIX

 TABLE Al

 IMITATIVE LEARNING ACTIONS

 Instrumental Actionsa Arbitrary Actions

 Compress spring Hit the side of the box
 Detach parts of PVC pipe Kick the top of the box
 Lift doorstop Kiss the top of the box
 Open hinge Pat one hand on top of the box
 Press doorbell Pat both hands on top of the box
 Pull ring Rub one hand on top of the box
 Slide bolt Rub both hands on top of the box
 Turn spinner Touch head to top of the box

 NoTE.-All actions were performed several times during each model with the exception of
 turning the spinner (which, incidentally, was almost never modeled because most infants did
 this action spontaeously), kissing the box, and touching the head to the box. The latter two
 actions were done in an exaggerated way.

 "a Alternate actions were move swing on or around stand, move straw on covered cup, twang

 small spring, and twist lid off covered cup.

 134

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 REFERENCES

 Abacus Concepts. (1989). SUPERANOVA: Accessible general linear modeling. Berkeley, CA: Aba-

 cus Concepts.

 Abravanel, E., & Gingold, H. (1985). Learning via observation during the second year of

 life. Developmental Psychology, 21 (4), 614-623.

 Abravanel, E., Levan-Goldschmidt, E., & Stevenson, M. B. (1976). Action imitation: The early

 phase of infancy. Child Development, 47, 1032-1044.

 Acredolo, L. P., & Goodwyn, S. W. (1988). Symbolic gesturing in normal infants. Child Develop-

 ment, 59, 450-466.

 Adamson, L. B. (1995). Communication development during infancy. Madison, WI: Brown &

 Benchmark.

 Adamson, L. B., & Bakeman, R. (1985). Affect and attention: Infants observed with mothers

 and peers. Child Development, 56, 582-593.

 Ainsworth, M. (1973). The development of infant-mother attachment. In B. Caldwell & H.
 Ricciuti (Eds.), Review of child development research (Vol. 3). Chicago: University of Chicago
 Press.

 Akhtar, N., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (1996). The role of discourse novelty in early

 word learning. Child Development, 67, 635-645.

 Akhtar, N., Dunham, F., & Dunham, P. J. (1991). Directive interactions and early vocabulary
 development: The role of joint attentional focus. Journal of Child Language, 18, 41-49.
 Akhtar, N., & Tomasello, M. (1996). Twenty-four month old children learn words for absent

 objects and actions. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 14, 79-93.

 Akhtar, N., & Tomasello, M. (in press). Intersubjectivity and early language. In S. Braaten
 (Ed.), Intersubjective communication and emotion in ontogeny. Cambridge University Press.

 Anisfeld, M. (1991). Review: Neonatal imitation. Developmental Review, 11, 60-97.
 Bakeman, R., & Adamson, L. (1984). Coordinating attention to people and objects in moth-

 er-infant and peer-infant interactions. Child Development, 55, 1278-1289.

 Bakeman, R., & Adamson, L. (1986). Infants' conventionalized acts: Gestures and words with

 mothers and peers. Infant Behavior and Development, 9, 215-230.

 Bakeman, R., & Gottman, J. (1986). Observing interaction: An introduction to sequential analysis.

 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Baldwin, D. (1991). Infants' contribution to the achievement ofjoint reference. Child Develop-

 ment, 63, 875-890.

 Baldwin, D. (1993a). Early referential understanding: Young children's ability to recognize

 referential acts for what they are. Developmental Psychology, 29, 1-12.

 Baldwin, D. (1993b). Infants' ability to consult the speaker for clues to word reference. Jour-

 nal of Child Language, 2, 395-418.

 135

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Baldwin, D. (1995). Understanding the link between joint attention and language. In C.
 Moore & P. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development. Hillsdale,
 NJ: Erlbaum.

 Baldwin, D., & Moses, L. (1996). The ontogeny of social information gathering. Child Develop-

 ment, 67, 1915-1939.

 Baron-Cohen, S. (1993). From attention-goal psychology to belief-desire psychology: The
 development of a theory of mind and its dysfunction. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-
 Flusberg, & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Understanding other minds: Perspectives from autism. New
 York: Oxford University Press.

 Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind. Cambridge, MA:

 MIT Press.

 Baron-Cohen, S., & Ring, H. (1994). A model of the mindreading system: Neuropsychologi-

 cal and neurobiological perspectives. In C. Lewis & P. Mitchell (Eds.), Children's early
 understanding of mind: Origins and development. Hove: Erlbaum.

 Barresi, J., & Moore, C. (1993). Sharing a perspective precedes the understanding of that

 perspective. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 513-514.

 Barresi, J., & Moore, C. (1996). Intentional relations and social understanding. Behavioral

 and Brain Sciences, 19, 107-154.

 Bart, W. M., & Airasian, P. W. (1974). Determination of the ordering among seven Piagetian

 tasks by an ordering-theoretic method. Journal of Educational Psychology, 66, 277-284.

 Bates, E. (1979). Intentions, conventions, and symbols. In E. Bates (Ed.), The emergence of

 symbols: Cognition and communication in infancy. New York: Academic.

 Bates, E., Benigni, L., Bretherton, I., Camaioni, L., & Volterra, V. (1979). Cognition and
 communication from nine to thirteen months: Correlational findings. In E. Bates (Ed.),
 The emergence of symbols: Cognition and communication in infancy. New York: Academic.

 Bates, E., Camaioni, L., & Volterra, V. (1975). The acquisition of performatives prior to

 speech. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 21, 205-224.

 Bretherton, I., McNew, S., & Beeghly-Smith, M. (1981). Early person knowledge as expressed

 in gestural and verbal communication: When do infants acquire a "theory of mind"?
 In M. E. Lamb & L. R. Sherrod (Eds.), Infant social cognition: Empirical and theoretical
 considerations. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Brown, P. (in press). The conversational context for language acquisition: A Tzeltal (Mayan)
 case study. In M. Bowerman & S. Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
 development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Bruner, J. (1975a). From communication to language. Cognition, 3, 255-287.
 Bruner, J. (1975b). The ontogenesis of speech acts. Journal of Child Language, 2, 1-20.
 Bruner, J. (1977). Early social interaction and language acquisition. In H. R. Schaffer (Ed.),

 Studies in mother-infant interaction. New York: Academic.

 Bruner, J. (1981). The pragmatics of acquisition. In W. Deutsch (Ed.), The child's construction

 of language. New York: Academic.

 Bruner, J. (1982). The organization of action and the nature of the adult-infant transaction.

 In E. Z. Tronick (Ed.), Social interchange in infancy: Affect, cognition, and communication.
 Baltimore: University Park.

 Bruner, J. (1983). Child's talk: Learning to use language. New York: Norton.
 Butterworth, G. (1991a, April). Evidence for the "geometric" comprehension of manual pointing.
 Paper presented at the meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development, Se-
 attle.

 Butterworth, G. (1991b). The ontogeny and phylogeny ofjoint visual attention. In A. Whiten
 (Ed.), Natural theories of mind: Evolution, development and simulation of everyday mindreading.
 Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.

 136

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 Butterworth, G., & Cochran, E. (1980). Towards a mechanism of joint visual attention in

 human infancy. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 3, 253-272.

 Butterworth, G., & Grover, L. (1988). The origins of referential communication in human

 infancy. In L. Weiskrantz (Ed.), Thought without language. Oxford: Clarendon.

 Butterworth, G., & Grover, L. (1990). Joint visual attention, manual pointing, and preverbal
 communication in human infancy. In M. Jeannerod (Ed.), Attention and performance XIII.
 Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Butterworth, G., & Jarrett, N. (1991). What minds have in common is space: Spatial mecha-

 nisms serving joint visual attention in infancy. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
 9, 55-72.

 Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (1996). The role of humans in the cognitive development of apes. In
 A. Russon (Ed.), Reaching into thought: The minds of the great apes. Cambridge: Cambridge
 University Press.

 Camaioni, L. (1993). The development of intentional communication: A re-analysis. In J.
 Nadel & L. Camaioni (Eds.), New perspectives in early communicative development. New York:
 Routledge.

 Campos, J., & Stenberg, C. (1981). Perception, appraisal, and emotion: The onset of social

 referencing. In M. Lamb & L. Sherrod (Eds.), Infant social cognition: Empirical and theoreti-
 cal considerations. Hillsdale, N.J: Erlbaum.

 Carpenter, M., Akhtar, N., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Fourteen- through 18-month-old infants
 differentially imitate intentional and accidental actions. Infant Behavior and Development,
 21, 315-330.

 Chomsky, N. (1968). Language and mind. New York: Harcourt Brace.
 Churcher, J., & Scaife, M. (1982). How infants see the point. In G. Butterworth & P. Light
 (Eds.), Social cognition: Studies of the development of understanding. Chicago: University of
 Chicago Press.

 Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard

 University Press.

 Collis, G. M. (1977). Visual co-orientation and maternal speech. In H. R. Schaffer (Ed.),

 Studies in mother-infant interaction. New York: Academic.

 Corkum, V., & Moore, C. (1995). Development of joint visual attention in infants. In C.

 Moore & P. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development. Hillsdale,
 NJ: Erlbaum.

 Corrigan, R. (1979). Cognitive correlates of language: Differential criteria yield differential

 results. Child Development, 50, 617-31.

 Csibra, G., Gergely, G., Bir6, S., & Koos, O. (in press). The perception of pure reason in

 infancy. Cognition.

 Decasper, A. J., & Fifer, W. P. (1980). Of human bonding: Newborns prefer their mothers'

 voices. Science, 208, 1174-1176.

 Della Corte, M., Benedict, H., & Klein, D. (1983). The relationship of pragmatic dimensions

 of mothers' speech to the referential-expressive distinction. Journal of Child Language,
 10, 35-43.

 D'Entremont, B., Hains, S., & Muir, D. (1997). A demonstration of gaze following in 3- to

 6-month-olds. Infant Behavior and Development, 20, 569-572.

 Desrochers, S., Morissette, P., & Ricard, M. (1995). Two perspectives on pointing in infancy.
 In C. Moore & P. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development. Hills-
 dale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Dunham, P. J., Dunham, F., & Curwin, A. (1993). Joint-attentional states and lexical acquisi-

 tion at 18 months. Developmental Psychology, 29, 827-831.

 Fantz, R. L. (1963). Pattern vision in newborn infants. Science, 140, 296-297.

 137

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, S., Thal, D., Bates, E., Hartung, J. P., Pethick, S., & Reilly,
 J. S. (1993). MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories: User's guide and technical
 manual. San Diego, CA: Singular.

 Fisher, K., & Silvern, L. (1985). Stages and individual differences in cognitive development.

 Annual Review of Psychology, 36, 613-648.

 Flavell, J. H. (1992). Perspectives on perspective taking. In H. Beilin & P. B. Pufall (Eds.),

 Piaget's theory: Prospects and possibilities. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Flavell, J., & Miller, P. (1998). Social cognition. In D. Kuhn & R. Siegler (Eds.), W. Damon
 (Series Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, Perception, and Language. New
 York: Wiley.

 Franco, F., & Butterworth, G. (1996). Pointing and social awareness: Declaring and re-

 questing in the second year. Journal of Child Language, 23, 307-336.

 Frye, D. (1991). The origins of intention in infancy. In D. Frye & C. Moore (Eds.), Children's

 theories of mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Gergely, G., NMdasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Bir6, S. (1995). Taking the intentional stance at 12

 months of age. Cognition, 56, 165-193.

 Gibson, E., & Rader, N. (1979). Attention: The perceiver as performer. In G. A. Hale & M.

 Lewis (Eds.), Attention and cognitive development. New York: Plenum.

 G6mez, J. C., Sarria, E., & Tamarit, J. (1993). The comparative study of early communication

 and theories of mind: Ontogeny, phylogeny, and pathology. In S. Baron-Cohen, H.
 Tager-Flusberg, & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Understanding other minds: Perspectives from autism.
 New York: Oxford University Press.

 Gopnik, A. (1984). The acquisition of gone and the development of the object concept. Jour-

 nal of Child Language, 11, 273-292.

 Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. (1987). The development of categorization in the second year
 and its relation to other cognitive and linguistic developments. Child Development, 58,
 1523-1531.

 Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. (1993). Imitation, cultural learning, and the origins of "theory

 of mind." Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 521-23.

 Gordon, R. (1986). Folk psychology as simulation. Mind and Language, 1, 158-71.
 Gordon, R. (1992). The simulation theory: Objections and misconceptions. Mind and lan-

 guage, 7, 87-103.

 Green, B. F. (1956). A method of scalogram analysis using summary statistics. Psychometrika,

 21(1), 79-88.

 Guttman, L. (1950). The basis for scalogram analysis. In S. A. Stouffer et al. (Eds.), Measure-

 ment and prediction. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

 Hannan, T. E. (1987). A cross-sequential assessment of the occurrences of pointing in 3- to

 12-month-old human infants. Infant Behavior and Development, 10, 11-22.

 Harding, C. G., & Golinkoff, R. M. (1979). The origins of intentional vocalizations in prelin-

 guistic infants. Child Development, 50, 33-40.

 Harris, P. (1996). Desires, beliefs, and language. In P. Carruthers & P. Smith (Eds.), Theories

 of theories of mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Harris, M., Jones, D., Brookes, S., & Grant, J. (1986). Relations between non-verbal context
 of maternal speech and rate of language development. British Journal of Developmental
 Psychology, 4, 261-268.

 Hobson, P. (1993). Autism and the development of mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
 Jones, S. (1996). Imitation or exploration? Young infants' matching of adults' oral gestures.

 Child Development, 67, 1952-1969.

 Kaye, K. (1982). The mental and social life of babies: How parents create persons. Chicago: University

 of Chicago Press.

 138

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 Killen, M., & Uzgiris, I. C. (1981). Imitation of actions with objects: The role of social mean-

 ing. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 138, 219-229.

 Kruger, A., & Tomasello, M. (1996). Cultural learning and learning culture. In D. Olson
 (Ed.), Handbook of education and human development: New models of teaching, learning, and
 schooling. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.

 Lempers, J. D. (1979). Young children's production and comprehension of nonverbal deictic

 behaviors. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 135, 93-102.

 Lempers, J. D., Flavell, E. R., & Flavell, J. H. (1977). The development in very young children
 of tacit knowledge concerning visual perception. Genetic Psychology Monographs, 95, 3-
 53.

 Leung, E. H. L., & Rheingold, H. L. (1981). Development of pointing as a social gesture.

 Developmental Psychology, 17 (2), 215-220.

 Lewis, C., & Mitchell, P. (1994). Children's early understanding of mind: Origins and development.

 Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Markman, E. (1989). Categorization and naming in children. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 Markman, E. (1992). Constraints on word learning: Speculations about their nature, origins,
 and word specificity. In M. Gunnar & M. Maratsos (Eds.), Modularity and constraints in
 language and cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Masur, E. F. (1983). Gestural development, dual-directional signaling, and the transition to

 words. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 12(2), 93-109.

 Masur, E. F., & Ritz, E. G. (1984). Patterns of gestural, vocal, and verbal imitation perfor-

 mance in infancy. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 30(4), 369-392.

 McCabe, M. A., & Uzgiris, I. C. (1983). Effects of model and action on imitation in infancy.

 Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 29(1), 69-82.

 McCall, R. B., Eichorn, D. H., & Hogarty, P. S. (1977). Transitions in early mental develop-

 ment. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 42(3, Serial No. 108).

 McCall, R. B., Parke, R. D., & Kavanaugh, R. D. (1977). Imitation of live and televised models
 by children one to three years of age. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Develop-
 ment, 42(5, Serial No. 173).

 Meltzoff, A. N. (1988a). Infant imitation after a 1-week delay: Long-term memory for novel

 acts and multiple stimuli. Developmental Psychology, 24, 470-476.

 Meltzoff, A. N. (1988b). Infant imitation and memory: Nine-month-olds in immediate and

 deferred tests. Child Development, 59, 217-225.

 Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of others: Re-enactment of intended

 acts by 18-month-old children. Developmental Psychology, 31(5), 1-16.

 Meltzoff, A. N., & Gopnik, A. (1993). The role of imitation in understanding persons and
 developing a theory of mind. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, & D. J. Cohen
 (Eds.), Understanding other minds: Perspectives from autism. New York: Oxford University
 Press.

 Meltzoff, A. N., & Moore, M. K. (1977). Imitation of facial and manual gestures by human

 neonates. Science, 198, 75-78.

 Meltzoff, A. N., & Moore, M. K. (1989). Imitation in newborn infants: Exploring the range
 of gestures imitated and the underlying mechanisms. Developmental Psychology, 25, 954-
 962.

 Moore, C. (1996). Theories of mind in infancy. BritishJournal of Developmental Psychology, 14,

 19-40.

 Moore, C., & Corkum, V. (1994). Social understanding at the end of the first year of life.

 Developmental Review, 14, 349-372.

 Moore, C., & Dunham, P. (Eds.). (1995). Joint attention: Its origins and role in development.

 Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 139

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Morissette, P., Ricard, M., & Gouin-Decarie, T. (1995). Joint visual attention and pointing
 in infancy: A longitudinal study of comprehension. British Journal ofDevelopmental Psychol-
 ogy, 15, 163-77.

 Morton, J., & Johnson, M. (1991). CONSPEC and CONLEARN: A two-process theory of

 infant face recognition. Psychological Review, 98, 164-181.

 Murphy, C. M., & Messer, D. J. (1977). Mothers, infants and pointing: A study of a gesture.

 In H. R. Schaffer (Ed.), Studies in mother-infant interaction. New York: Academic.

 Murray, L., & Trevarthen, C. (1985). Emotional regulation of interactions between two-

 month-olds and their mothers. In T. M. Field & N. A. Fox (Eds.), Social perception in
 infants. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

 Nelson, K (1973). Structure and strategy in learning to talk. Monographs of the Society for

 Research in Child Development, 38(1-2, Serial No. 149).

 Nelson, K (1981). Individual differences in language development: Implications for develop-

 ment and language. Developmental Psychology, 17, 170-187.

 Ninio, A., & Bruner, J. (1978). The achievement and antecedents of labelling. Journal of Child

 Language, 5, 1-15.

 Pawlby, S. J. (1977). Imitative interaction. In H. R. Schaffer (Ed.), Studies in mother-infant

 interaction. New York: Academic.

 Perucchini, P., & Camaioni, L. (1993, September). When intentional communication emerges?
 Developmental dissociations between declarative and imperative functions of the pointing gesture.
 Paper presented at the Developmental Conference of the British Psychological Society,
 Birmingham.

 Phillips, W., Baron-Cohen, S., & Rutter, M. (1992). The role of eye contact in goal detection:
 Evidence from normal infants and children with autism or mental handicap. Development
 and Psychopathology, 4, 375-383.

 Piaget, J. (1952). Origins of intelligence in children. New York: Norton.
 Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams, and imitation in childhood. New York: Norton.
 Pinker, S. (1994). The language instinct. New York: Morrow.
 Povinelli, D. J., & Eddy, T.J. (1996). What young chimpanzees know about seeing. Monographs

 of the Society for Research in Child Development, 61(3, Serial No. 247).

 Ratner, N., & Bruner, J. (1978). Games, social exchange and the acquisition of language.

 Journal of Child Language, 5, 391-401.

 Reissland, N. (1988). Neonatal imitation in the first hour of life: Observations in rural Nepal.

 Developmental Psychology, 24, 464-469.

 Rocissano, L., & Yatchmink, Y. (1984). Joint attention in mother-toddler interaction: A study

 of individual variation. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 30, 11-31.

 Rodgon, M. M., & Kurdek, L. A. (1977). Vocal and gestural imitation in 8-, 14-, and 20-

 month-old children. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 131, 115-123.

 Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Ross, H. S., & Lollis, S. P. (1987). Communication within infant social games. Developmental

 Psychology, 23(2), 241-248.

 Ruddy, M., & Bornstein, M. (1982). Cognitive correlates of infant attention and maternal

 stimulation over the first year of life. Child Development, 53, 183-188.

 Rutter, D. R., & Durkin, K (1987). Turn-taking in mother-infant interaction: An examina-

 tion of vocalizations and gaze. Developmental Psychology, 23(1), 54-61.

 Saxon, T., Frick, J., & Colombo, J. (1997). A longitudinal study of maternal interactional

 styles and infant visual attention. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 43, 48-66.

 Scaife, M., & Bruner, J. S. (1975). The capacity for joint visual attention in the infant. Nature,

 253, 265-266.

 Schaffer, H. R., & Liddell, D. (1984). Adult-child interaction under dyadic and polyadic

 conditions. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 2, 33-42.

 140

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 Scheffelin, B., & Ochs, E. (1986). Language socialization across cultures. Cambridge: Cambridge

 University Press.

 Smith, C. B., Adamson, L. B., & Bakeman, R. (1988). Interactional predictors of early lan-

 guage. First Language, 8, 143-156.

 Smith, L. (1995). Self-organizing processes in learning to learn words. In C. A. Nelson (Ed.),

 Basic and applied perspectives on learning, cognition, and development (Minnesota Symposium
 on Child Psychology, Vol. 28). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Smith, L., & Samuelson, L. (1997). Perceiving and remembering: Category stability, variabil-
 ity, and development. In K. Lamberts & D. Shanks (Eds.), Knowledge, concepts, and catego-
 ries. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Snow, C., & Goldfield, B. (1983). Turn the page please: Situation-specific language acquisi-

 tion. Journal of Child Language, 10, 551-570.

 Sugarman, S. (1984). The development of preverbal communication: Its contribution and

 limits in promoting the development of language. In R. L. Schiefelbusch & J. Pickar
 (Eds.), The acquisition of communicative competence. Baltimore: University Park.

 Sugarman-Bell, S. (1978). Some organizational aspects of pre-verbal communication. In I.

 Markovai (Ed.), The social context of language. New York: Wiley.

 Tamis-LeMonda, C., & Bornstein, M. (1989). Habituation and maternal encouragement of

 attention in infancy as predictors of toddler language, play, and representational compe-
 tence. Child Development, 60, 738-751.

 Tomasello, M. (1988). The role of joint attentional processes in early language development.

 Language Sciences, 10, 69-88.

 Tomasello, M. (1990). Cultural transmission in the tool use and communicatory signaling

 of chimpanzees? In S. Parker & K. Gibson (Eds.), "Language" and intelligence in primates:
 Developmental perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Tomasello, M. (1992). The social bases of language acquisition. Social Development, 1(1), 67-

 87.

 Tomasello, M. (1994). The question of chimpanzee culture. In R. Wrangham, W. McGrew,
 F. de Waal, & P. Heltne (Eds.), Chimpanzee cultures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
 Press.

 Tomasello, M. (1995a).Joint attention as social cognition. In C. Moore & P. Dunham (Eds.),

 Joint attention: Its origins and role in development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Tomasello, M. (1995b). Language is not an instinct. Cognitive Development, 10, 131-156.
 Tomasello, M. (1996a). Do apes ape? In C. Heyes & B. Galef (Eds.), Social learning in animals:

 The roots of culture. New York: Academic.

 Tomasello, M. (1996b). Self as social agent. In P. Rochat (Ed.), The self in infancy: Theory and

 research. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

 Tomasello, M. (in press). Understanding intentions and learning words in the second year
 of life. In M. Bowerman & S. Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual develop-
 ment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Tomasello, M., & Akhtar, N. (1995). Two-year-olds use pragmatic cues to differentiate refer-

 ence to objects and actions. Cognitive Development, 10, 201-224.

 Tomasello, M., & Barton, M. (1994). Learning words in nonostensive contexts. Developmental

 Psychology, 30, 639-650.

 Tomasello, M., & Call, J. (1997). Primate Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Tomasello, M., & Camaioni, L. (1997). A comparison of the gestural communication of apes

 and human infants. Human Development, 40, 7-24.

 Tomasello, M., & Farrar, M. J. (1986a). Joint attention and early language. Child Development,

 57, 1454-1463.

 Tomasello, M., & Farrar, M. J. (1986b). Object permanence and relational words: A lexical

 training study. Journal of Child Language, 13, 495-505.

 141

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Tomasello, M., Kruger, A. C., & Ratner, H. H. (1993). Cultural learning. Behavioral and Brain

 Sciences, 16, 495-552.

 Tomasello, M., Mannle, S., & Barton, M. (1989). The development of communicative compe-

 tence in twins. Revue Internationale de Psychologie Sociale, 2, 49-59.

 Tomasello, M., Mannle, S., & Kruger, A. (1986). The linguistic environment of one to two

 year old twins. Developmental Psychology, 22, 169-176.

 Tomasello, M., & Mervis, C. B. (1994). Commentary: The instrument is great, but measuring

 comprehension is still a problem. In L. Fenson et al., Variability in Early Communicative
 Development. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 59(5, Serial No.
 242).

 Tomasello, M., Savage-Rumbaugh, S., & Kruger, A. C. (1993). Imitative learning of actions

 on objects by children, chimpanzees, and enculturated chimpanzees. Child Development,
 64, 1688-1705.

 Tomasello, M., & Todd, J. (1983).Joint attention and lexical acquisition style. First Language,

 4, 197-212.

 Trevarthen, C. (1979a). Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A description of
 primary intersubjectivity. In M. M. Bullowa (Ed.), Before speech: The beginning of interper-
 sonal communication. New York: Cambridge University Press.

 Trevarthen, C. (1979b). Instincts for human understanding and for cultural cooperation:
 Their development in infancy. In M. von Cranach, K. Foppa, W. Lepenies, & D. Ploog
 (Eds.), Human ethology: Claims and limits of a new discipline. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
 versity Press.

 Trevarthen, C., & Hubley, P. (1978). Secondary intersubjectivity: Confidence, confiding and
 acts of meaning in the first year. In A. Lock (Ed.), Action, gesture, and symbol: The emergence
 of language. New York: Academic.

 Tronick, E. Z. (1989). Emotions and emotional communication in infants. American Psycholo-

 gist, 44, 112-119.

 Uzgiris, I. C., & Hunt, J. M. V. (1975). Assessment in infancy: Ordinal scales of psychological

 development. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

 Vibbert, M., & Bornstein, M. (1989). Specific associations between domains of maternal-
 child interaction and toddler referential language and pretense play. Infant Behavior and
 Development, 12, 163-184.

 Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge,

 MA: Harvard University Press.

 Vygotsky, L., & Luria, A. (1993). Studies on the history of behavior. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
 Walden, T., & Ogan, T. (1988). The development of social referencing. Child Development,

 59, 1230-1240.

 Zentall, T. (1996). An analysis of imitative learning in animals. In C. Heyes & B. Galef (Eds.),

 Social learning in animals: The roots of culture. New York: Academic.

 Zinober, B., & Martlew, M. (1985). Developmental changes in four types of gesture in rela-
 tion to acts and vocalizations from 10 to 21 months. British Journal ofDevelopmental Psychol-
 ogy, 3, 293-306.

 142

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

 This research was supported by a grant from the Spencer Foundation to

 Michael Tomasello and by a National Institute of Mental Health Postdoctoral
 Training Grant to Malinda Carpenter. We thank Laura Rekau for help collect-
 ing and coding data, Nameera Akhtar and Danielle Weir for help with the
 analyses of mothers' speech, Steve Cole and Josep Call for help with data
 analysis, and the parents and children who participated in the study. We also
 thank three anonymous reviewers for very helpful comments. Please address
 correspondence to Malinda Carpenter at School of Biological Sciences, Nich-
 olson Building, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, United Kingdom;
 or at mcarpent@liverpool.ac.uk.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 143

 COMMENTARY

 ORIGINS OF JOINT VISUAL ATTENTION IN INFANCY

 George Butterworth

 Introduction

 To take the "intentional stance" toward persons (or other complex sys-

 tems) is to attribute rationality, beliefs, and desires to them (Dennett, 1987).
 When do human infants attribute rationality to other people? When do they
 take the intentional stance with respect to the shared objects of their own
 and other's experience? Is the intentional stance the sine qua non of human
 communication? Carpenter, Nagell, and Tomasello claim that the intentional
 stance emerges toward the end of the first year of life, as the infant progresses
 from sharing attention, to following attention, and finally to directing the
 attention of others. Their argument, which is well made, is that social cogni-
 tive skills, rather than nonsocial actions on objects, lie at the heart of the
 transition from preverbal communication to language. Their evidence comes
 from the pattern of intercorrelation of emerging abilities in the period from
 9 to 15 months, in particular, the emerging ability of the infant intentionally
 to redirect other's attention, which they take as evidence for attributing mind
 to others.

 However, another possibility exists, namely, that unambiguously inten-

 tional communication arises in development when cognitive developmental
 changes begin to supplement the infant's direct experience of the commu-
 nicative intentions of others. If this is true, then a rather different time-

 Much of the research reported here was funded by the Economic and Social Research
 Council of Great Britain in grants to the author and his colleagues. This Commentary was
 written with the support of a Leverhulme Foundation research fellowship, which is gratefully
 acknowledged.

 144

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 table for the emergence of joint visual attention in relation to referential
 communication and pointing seems possible. This Commentary will address
 the question of whether there is evidence for joint visual attention prior to
 the timetable proposed by Carpenter et al. It will be argued that, while the
 developmental changes that Carpenter et al. observe at 9-12 months are not
 themselves in dispute, they do not constitute the origin of joint visual atten-
 tion. The widespread changes that they observe reflect a new ability to inte-
 grate events across progressively larger gaps in space and time. This new abil-
 ity serves the comprehension and production of pointing, but joint visual
 attention is already in place and has been for many months.

 Carpenter et al.'s finding that joint visual attention actually begins to-
 ward the end of the first year, just before the production of pointing, is incon-
 sistent with much recent data and probably reflects the robust criteria that
 they adopted for emergence and their spatial conditions of testing. Further
 evidence will be reviewed concerning the relation between joint attention,
 pointing, and the development of language, and an alternative theory to that
 of pointing acquisition by ritualization will be proposed. Finally, the relation
 between a perceptual-ecological approach and a cognitive developmental ap-
 proach to early communicative development will be addressed. These ap-
 proaches are not mutually exclusive, and both types of account are needed
 to understand the origins of communicative competence. Indeed, referential
 communication, even among adults, may depend at least in part on ecological
 factors that assist in determining the precise objects of reference.

 On the Origins of Intentionality

 Carpenter et al. take rather a conservative stance on the emergence of
 joint visual attention. Although their description of the onset of robust triadic
 attention at 13 months agrees broadly with that reported by most observers,
 and although they offer useful new information on the interrelations among
 constituent skills, their specific theoretical proposals concerning the develop-
 ment of pointing are open to alternative interpretations. Carpenter et al. do
 not directly research the mechanisms that may underlie the emergence of
 joint visual attention, and their concluding account of the possible relations
 between pointing onset and language is speculative. Alternative theoretical
 scenarios will be sketched, but first it is necessary to address the central ques-
 tion of the origins of intentionality.

 In common with Piaget (1952), Carpenter et al. attribute intentionality
 to infants at around 9-12 months. Piaget argued that intentions are first seen
 in coordinated secondary circular reactions, when the infant performs a se-
 quence of actions as a means to an end. Piaget did not deny that infants may
 have intentions before 9-12 months; he merely said that it is difficult to rule

 145

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 out nonintentional explanations for behavior until infants coordinate sepa-
 rate activities in a goal-directed fashion. Thus, Carpenter et al. are essentially
 following Piaget's timetable in tracing the origins of intentionality to the pe-
 riod of secondary circular reactions. Where they differ from Piaget, however,
 is in distinguishing social cognitive development from physical cognition and
 in arguing that the baby not only controls her own actions intentionally but
 also attributes intentions to others. Taking the intentional stance is the first
 step in attributing mind to others, and this emergent ability separates human
 cognition from that of the higher primates. Although human infants are com-
 parable to other primates in the development of physical cognition, they rap-
 idly outstrip higher primates in social cognition, especially as language de-
 velops.

 The theory is fully spelled out in Tomasello and Call (1997), and it will

 be useful to be clear on the details. The infant's newly emergent intentional
 stance on communication and imitation is thought to allow her to tune in
 to others' focus of attention by gaze following, to do what someone else is
 doing through imitative learning, and to engage in emotional communica-
 tion through social referencing. Babies also become intentional agents them-
 selves and act in such a way that others come to tune in to their own focus
 of attention, through gestures such as pointing. All these skills emerge con-
 currently because they are manifestations of the newfound ability to under-
 stand others as intentional agents. An intentional agent is "an animate being
 that chooses its own goals, [chooses] behavioural means for pursuing goals
 and [chooses] attentional foci for monitoring progress toward goals" (Toma-
 sello & Call, 1997, p. 405).

 There are further ramifications of this cognitive revolution, including the
 beginning of self-consciousness. The distance between humans and higher
 primates increases as humans engage in imitative learning and teaching,
 whereas higher primates emulate (i.e., they may learn through observation
 how to achieve a particular goal but without paying close attention to the
 precise means). Humans communicate through symbols, and they recognize
 attention as a mental state, whereas animals communicate through signals
 and recognize attention merely as a bodily orientation. Human gestures are
 said to be acquired by imitation, and they are socially transmitted, whereas
 higher primates acquire gestures by ontogenetic ritualization, a process in
 which the signal function of the gesture arises idiosyncratically in social inter-
 action. Such gestures are neither socially nor transgenerationally transmitted
 among the higher primates, but they are transmitted in precisely those ways
 between humans.

 These extensive qualitative distinctions between different levels of orga-

 nization are helpful in differentiating the mechanisms supporting similar sur-
 face behaviors across species and at different stages of development. However,
 since Carpenter et al.'s emphasis is almost exclusively on cognitive processes

 146

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 whose origins can be traced to the period 9-12 months, the precursors of
 joint visual attention tend to be neglected. The focus on cognitive attribution
 as a core ability may give a misleading picture of the species-typical founda-
 tions for communication. Of particular concern are those aspects of human
 embodiment that serve as signals and that are deeply involved in the develop-
 ment of referential communication. The intentional stance is presented by
 Carpenter et al. as both necessary and sufficient for joint visual attention, but
 this is to sideline the role of perception and action systems in the emergence
 of human communication.

 An alternative theoretical approach, one that also recognizes intention-
 ality, among other factors, would be to argue that intentionality itself ad-
 mits of degrees. On this view, intentionality includes innate aspects based
 on the direct perception of physical and social objects, goal-directed activ-
 ity (i.e., intentions expressed in and read from instrumental actions), and
 deliberation and forethought (i.e., intentions expressed in cognition and
 also revealed through language). The emergent intentionality observed
 in the period 9-12 months could be considered an intermediate form bridg-
 ing earlier "perceptual," current (9-12 months) "instrumental," and future
 "represented" intentions. Goal-directed action can be observed even in new-
 borns (e.g., Butterworth & Hopkins, 1989; Lew & Butterworth, 1995, 1997),
 in 2-month-old babies (e.g., Kalnins & Bruner, 1974), and in numerous well-
 researched examples in early infancy, such as visually guided reaching (e.g.,
 Bower, Broughton, & Moore, 1970; Von Hofsten, 1990).

 In the interpersonal realm, newborn babies imitate oral movements,
 vowel sounds, and finger movements (see Butterworth, in press). Two-
 month-olds in interaction with their mothers are said to show social com-
 municative protointentions (e.g., Trevarthen, 1990). These abilities need to
 be explained, not only in terms of the underlying mechanisms for social par-
 ticipation, but also in terms of the infant's intrinsic motives for communica-
 tion.

 Such early appearing forms of intentionality have been described by Ve-
 deler (1994) as object-directed intentions. That is, the intended objects of
 action and interaction are in the physical and social environment: they are
 not the purely mental objects that are emphasized by traditional philosophy
 of mind and on which the theory of the intentional stance is based. From
 the outset, object-directed intentionality is a property of behavior, whereas
 intentions as "purely mental" objects take time to develop. Thus, evidence
 that babies may attribute intentionality (rather than perceive intentionality
 in the communicative actions of others) comes only later in infancy.

 Similarly, even though the weight of modern evidence suggests that imi-
 tation is innate and based on perception (Butterworth, in press), it is only
 in the second year that babies will imitate an intended action when they have
 simply observed a failed action, once the requisite representational ability is

 147

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 available (Meltzoff, 1995). This later appearing ability requires the infant to
 foresee the intended outcome; it occurs at an age when language is becoming
 well established, and some would call this insight. Carpenter et al. call it the
 intentional stance. The first theoretical disagreement, then, with Carpenter
 et al. is that there is no graduation ceremony in development at which inten-
 tionality is first conferred on the infant. Similarly, joint attention admits of
 development, and it can be shown to be present, in an honest form, long
 before the 9-12-month watershed.

 The Emergence of Joint Attention

 From the outset, the major theoretical effect of Scaife and Bruner's

 (1975) pioneering study was on received theories of infant egocentrism.
 Their observation suggested that very young babies share perspectives with
 others, that they are not locked into a solipsistic universe, and that they rely
 on perception for information about physical and social reality. The fact that
 infants as young as 2 months follow a change in the orientation of gaze of
 an adult is not possible in traditional theories, such as Piaget's (1952, 1954;
 see Butterworth, 1987). Carpenter et al. maintain that joint attention in gaze
 following is not observed consistently until 13 months, 1.3 months later than
 babies follow pointing (at 11.7 months in their data) and at about the time
 that they produce declarative pointing (at 12.6 months). Corkum and Moore
 (1995), Moore and Corkum (1994), and Morissette, Ricard, and Gouin-
 Decarie (1995) also offer a similar timetable for the emergence ofjoint visual
 attention. That is, between Scaife and Bruner's (1975) original observation
 and the present, the developmental timetable for the origins of joint visual
 attention has been set back by about a year! The consequence is that the
 significance for developmental theory of an early form of perceptually based
 perspective sharing is in danger of being overlooked.

 One reason why the age of emergence of joint visual attention has been

 progressively delayed in successive studies is that conservative diagnostic crite-
 ria have often been adopted. The criterion for success in Carpenter et al.'s
 study was that babies should show a correct response to each of two targets
 on either side of the room. That is, babies must accurately localize a target
 at approximately 45 degrees, at a distance of either 6 feet or 6 feet, 6 inches
 (to the baby's right or left), and they must also localize a more peripheral
 target at about 80 degrees, at a distance of between 4 feet and 4 feet, 6 inches,
 also to the right and the left (see Carpenter et al.'s Figure 1). This spatial
 arrangement requires the baby to ignore the 45-degree target in order cor-
 rectly to localize the more peripheral referent on the same side of the room.
 Similarly, Corkum and Moore (1995) applied a stringent criterion that

 infants should show spontaneous gaze following and make a run of five con-

 148

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 secutive correct responses in order to be credited with the capacity for joint
 visual attention. Even so, they were unable to train infants to make eye move-
 ments in the opposite direction to an adult's signal, which suggests that direc-
 tional cues are important even at 6 months. Morissette et al. (1995) also used
 large spatial separations of the targets and stringent scoring criteria in their
 study, which showed joint visual attention to be coincident with comprehen-
 sion of pointing at 12-15 months.

 Stringent performance criteria and demanding spatial conditions will
 certainly show when a robust ability for joint visual attention is available, but
 these procedures do not allow for early appearing joint visual attention. The
 consequence is that they also conflate the later developing pointing system
 with the early appearing capacity for joint visual attention.

 There are a number of methodological reasons that may make it appear
 that gaze following, comprehension, and production of pointing are coinci-
 dent in development, even though gaze following actually occurs much ear-
 lier. In Carpenter et al.'s relatively informal tests, the visual environment was
 cluttered and asymmetrical, and, on the adult's cue, infants must break off
 from attending to an attractive toy. While this may be more typical of the
 conditions under which joint attention occurs in everyday life, the test makes
 strong demands on the babies' capacity to regulate attention and to inhibit
 attention at one focus of activity in favor of a new one. Furthermore, to reach
 the performance criterion for joint visual attention, not only must the babies
 look in the correct direction, but they must also single out the correct target
 on each of two trials to the near and far locations. The far location requires
 the child to inhibit any tendency to fixate the near location on the scan path
 from the adult. Not until all these conditions are satisfied are infants credited
 with joint attention on the basis of gaze following, which turns out to be after
 they comprehend pointing.

 Others, using different procedures, have consistently claimed that joint

 visual attention can be observed at least as early as 6 months, long before
 there is evidence for the comprehension of pointing (e.g., Butterworth &
 Cochran, 1980; Butterworth & Jarrett, 1991; D'Entremont, Hains, & Muir,
 1997; Scaife & Bruner, 1975). How can these conflicting studies be recon-
 ciled? Experimental and naturalistic studies differ widely in their parameters
 and their criteria for when joint attention may be first observed. Babies at 6
 months are notoriously flighty, but that does not mean that joint attention
 is impossible.

 For example, Butterworth and Cochran (1980) and Butterworth and Jar-
 rett (1991) carried out studies with participants as young as 6 months, in an
 undistracting laboratory, with the walls screened by curtains to form a neutral
 background. Identical targets were systematically, symmetrically located, rela-
 tively close to the experimenter and infant (minimum and maximum dis-
 tances in the infant's visual field were approximately 1 meter at 60 degrees

 149

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 from the midline and 2.60 meters at 30 degrees from the midline), who were
 seated "en face," at the same height as the targets. Whether babies were
 correct in reorienting their attention to particular target positions at different
 ages could be assessed. Distracting objects were not permitted to be held by
 the infant, the adult changed her focus of attention by reorienting her head,
 eyes, and trunk, without speaking, and she held the posture for approximately
 5 seconds. The aim was to establish the spatial conditions under which 6-
 month-old babies could "follow into" a change in the adult's direction of
 gaze. Under these conditions there was no doubt that infants would accu-
 rately respond to the spatial direction (left or right) of the adult's signal. Nor
 were the babies imitating the adult since there was a measurable delay be-
 tween the adult's signal and the infant's response and the placement of tar-
 gets often required asymmetrical rather than mirror-image responses by the
 infant.

 The scoring protocol compared infant responses to targets in the correct

 direction with those in the incorrect direction, and babies at 6 months
 showed significantly more responses to targets on the correct side. At 6
 months, the probability of a response was less than among older babies, and
 infants were not necessarily accurate in locating the correct target. However,
 they were clearly capable of reorienting attention on the basis of an adult's
 signal (Butterworth & Jarrett, 1991). Babies at 6 months code the general
 direction in which to look from the adult's change of orientation, but the
 adult's signal does not carry precise information for the location of the target.
 Further studies showed that babies younger than 1 year could be accurate
 (i) if the correct target was stationary and first along the baby's scan path
 into the periphery of vision or (ii) if both targets were simultaneously in mo-
 tion and the correct target was the more peripheral of the two (Grover, 1988).
 That is, attention-worthy object attributes in the periphery of vision may assist
 the young baby to establish a common focus for joint attention, on the basis
 of a change in the adult's direction of gaze.

 Other important factors (some mentioned by Carpenter et al.) included
 whether the visual field was empty or contained potential targets. With an
 empty visual field, babies at 12 months searched through about 40 degrees
 from their own midline and then gave up (Butterworth & Cochran, 1980).
 That is, the infant takes the adult's signal to refer to a potential object some-
 where within a shared visual space, into which she will follow the adult's
 change of gaze. However, when the infant's own change in focus of attention
 fails to terminate in an object (because the shared visual field is empty), the
 process of achieving joint visual attention terminates. Changes in the adult's
 direction of gaze, accompanied by reorientation of head and body posture,
 were sufficient to lead to a statistically reliable response of the infant's direc-
 tion of gaze to the appropriate side of the room. Adding pointing was actually
 counterproductive for babies of 6 and 9 months since it did not increase

 150

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 accuracy of target localization and often resulted in the baby fixating the
 adult's hand (Butterworth & Grover, 1989). At 12 months, however, adding
 pointing did improve the accuracy of target localization, and, by 15 months,
 there was a definite advantage when pointing was added to head and eye
 movements in a relatively large-scale environment with targets at distances
 up to 4.7 meters (Butterworth, 1991; Butterworth & Grover, 1989).

 In Scaife and Bruner's (1975) original study, babies followed the adult's
 direction of gaze, to the left or the right, into an empty visual field. The
 requirement for success at this most elementary developmental level was that
 the infant need only look in the appropriate direction, and the absence of
 objects may have made the effect particularly fragile. Collis (1977) was unable
 to replicate joint visual attention in such young infants. D'Entremont et al.
 (1997), however, have successfully demonstrated that 4-month-old babies can
 look in the same direction as an adult. These investigators ensured that target
 objects were directly in front of the baby, just to the left and the right, within
 her span of apprehension. There was no requirement to single out a particu-
 lar target among many potential targets, and joint attention was inferred from
 the fact that the response terminated at the target located in the appropriate
 direction. That is, the process may be one in which the infant encodes the
 direction of the object of the adult's gaze and/or head orientation and the
 specific referent singles itself out as it comes into the periphery of vision.
 Hood, Willen, and Driver (1998) showed that babies of 4 months who were
 cued to look in a particular direction by the orientation of the eyes on a face
 presented as a computer display would do so. For adults, the eye movements
 in such displays take precedence in allocating attention, even when their di-
 rection does not predict the location of a subsequent event. Hood et al.
 (1998) suggest that the same mechanisms may be involved in directing eye
 movements as in allocating visual attention. Thus, following gaze may indeed
 give access to attention as "intentional perception" (Gibson & Rader, 1979).
 The theory that joint visual attention may presuppose intentional objects

 within the visual field is supported by a series of studies in which the number
 and dynamic characteristics of the targets available to babies were varied
 (Grover, 1988). The number of targets in the baby's visual field influenced
 the probability of a response, with two targets reliably eliciting more re-
 sponses than just one. Caron, Krakowski, Liu, and Brooks (1996) also showed
 that 14-month-old infants are sensitive to the presence or absence of poten-
 tial targets in joint visual attention tasks. This suggests that joint visual atten-
 tion depends, at least in part, on the adult's signal helping resolve uncertainty
 about the aspect of the environment that is being referred to. Indeed, as
 Carpenter et al. point out, not only may checking between object and adult
 reveal communicative intent, but it may also be important in providing con-
 firmation that attention has been reoriented to the appropriate referent, an
 important consideration in making definite reference.

 151

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 How the infant's responses are scored is also important in determining
 what mechanism may be involved in joint visual attention at any particular
 age. The evidence already reviewed suggests that joint attention as signaled
 by changes in head, body, and gaze orientation precedes comprehension of
 pointing. Differences in scoring procedures may have led to some confusion
 in the literature. Where the scoring procedure directly compared spatially
 incorrect with correct responses, there was evidence that at 6 months babies
 look in the correct direction significantly more often than they look in the
 incorrect direction (Butterworth, 1991; Butterworth & Cochran, 1980; Butter-
 worth &Jarrett, 1991). Where responses in the incorrect horizontal direction
 are summed with other incorrect responses (e.g., looking down or otherwise
 disengaging from the task), the first evidence for robust joint visual attention
 comes at about 12 months (Morissette et al., 1995).

 Therefore, once the competing evidence is carefully analyzed, it is clear

 that joint visual attention is possible, under appropriate conditions, before
 the 9-12-month watershed. In postulating that an "ecological" mechanism
 serves the earliest form ofjoint attention, Butterworth andJarrett (1991) were
 suggesting something more subtle than that the baby's attention is merely
 "grabbed" by something entering the periphery of vision. The argument is
 that, at root, joint visual attention is an object-directed process that relates
 to the real world. The fundamental mechanism therefore requires real-world
 objects in which otherwise unrelated minds can meet. The ecological mecha-
 nism depends on a two-part process, in which the adult's change of orienta-
 tion carries information for a potential object in a particular hemifield of
 visual space. A triangulation then occurs, in which the meeting of minds is
 completed by the intentional encounter with the object itself. That is, the
 interesting object can be considered as the terminus of an intentional action
 on the part of both the adult and the infant. The baby perceives the adult's
 reorienting of gaze and posture as an object-relevant signal. Then the object
 or event that first attracted the adult's interest also captures the infant's inter-
 est, thus allowing both minds to meet in the same object. This is a presym-
 bolic mechanism that enables communication within the spatial constraints
 that apply to the 6-month-old infant. The question of resolving uncertainty
 also raises the important issue of how links between joint visual attention and
 the species-typical expression of emotions in humans may assist in explaining
 the origins of human communication (Baldwin & Moses, 1996; Campos et
 al., 1983).

 The Transition to Pointing Comprehension

 If joint visual attention is possible from early in development, why does
 comprehension and production of manual pointing occur only toward the

 152

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 end of the first year, as Carpenter et al. and others have shown? Among the
 most important constraints on joint attention in early infancy is the capacity
 to integrate actions and events across gaps in space and time. Millar and
 Schaffer (1972, 1973) showed that babies of 6 months of age readily learned
 to bang on a canister for contingent light reinforcement, which occurred at
 the same place where they were banging (i.e., under conditions of complete
 contiguity between stimulus and response). Infants at 6 months also learned
 such a response when the location of the reinforcer was more distant than
 the location of the response, so long as there was a spatial cue to assist the
 infant to attend to the reinforcer within the same visual field as the response
 (i.e., under conditions of linear noncontiguity). However, they failed to learn
 this simple operant if the light reinforcer was displaced by 60 degrees from
 the site of the response (i.e., under conditions of displaced noncontiguity).
 Millar and Schaffer found that, before 9 months, dividing attention between
 an action and its consequences presents major difficulties for the infant be-
 cause attention must be coordinated between separate foci.

 Evidence is widespread that a rapid, stage-like change occurs in the abil-
 ity to bridge such gaps in space and time between 9 and 12 months, including
 the study of joint visual attention by Carpenter et al. This change may be
 linked with maturation of frontal lobe functions that allow infants to make
 rapid progress in solving delayed-response tasks. Diamond (1991), for exam-
 ple, reports that babies can successfully search for hidden objects in delayed-
 response Piagetian Stage IV search tasks with a delay of 3 seconds at 9 months,
 which increases to 12 seconds by 12 months. In these tasks, the infant must
 keep track of the successive positions of the hidden object across a small spa-
 tial gap, typically just a few centimeters, between the hiding locations. There
 is therefore a very rapid change in the capacity to integrate successive atten-
 tional foci over space and time at this stage of development (see also Dia-
 mond, Werker, & Lalonde, 1994).

 Given such a rapidly developing capacity to integrate attention to sepa-

 rate loci, the precise spatiotemporal demands of different tasks may be suffi-
 cient to account for the variety of estimates of the age of pointing comprehen-
 sion. Both Morissette et al. (1995) and Carpenter et al. found that pointing
 comprehension occurred earlier for nearby than for more distant targets.
 Morissette et al. (1995) found that the angle subtended by the targets, relative
 to the baby, influenced the probability of pointing comprehension. Targets
 at 20 degrees from the midline and 0.85 meters distance were localized at
 12 months, whereas targets at 70 degrees and 2.11 meters were localized at
 15 months.

 Others have also found similar effects of the particular spatial conditions
 of testing (Lempers, 1976; Murphy & Messer, 1977). Carpenter et al. also
 note that babies showed joint visual attention to targets on their right 2
 months before showing it to targets on their left. Butterworth and Jarrett

 153

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 (1991) did not find any advantage to the right side of the room in the case
 of gaze comprehension, but Butterworth and Morissette (1996) found a
 strong right-hand and right-side advantage in the production of pointing.
 These observations could be important in implicating cerebral asymmetries in
 joint visual attention, which would allow further links with language-specific
 precursors. However, such spatially asymmetrical effects seem to require an-
 other level of explanation than the "intentional stance," which is presumably
 not restricted to the right half of the visual field.

 In summary, the ability to integrate information across spatiotemporal
 gaps may be one of the basic underlying processes that allow the comprehen-
 sion of pointing. The increasing distance of targets that are accessible to joint
 visual attention may simply reflect changes in the ability to integrate attention
 to events at different foci across space and time. This may also account for
 developmentally coincident changes in the ability to sequence actions as a
 means to an end.

 The Signal Values of Different Joint-Attention Cues

 Butterworth and Jarrett (1991) describe a transition at about 12 months
 from an "ecological" mechanism (in which the attentioncapturing character-
 istics of the object complete the reference triangle) to a "geometric" mecha-
 nism, which enables the baby to single out targets at more peripheral loca-
 tions among multiple objects. This new factor in joint visual attention was
 operationally defined as the ability to ignore the first object along the scan
 path in favor of a more peripheral target. The mechanism was called geometric
 because it appeared to involve extrapolation of vectors through visual space,
 an ability that seemed to require greater precision than before.

 Recent studies have examined just how precisely babies, children, and
 adults can locate where someone else is looking or pointing (Butterworth,
 1997a; Itakura & Butterworth, 1997). One study with young adults enabled
 precise determination of the accuracy of spatial localization of various joint
 visual attention signals. Participants were 72 female Japanese college students
 aged 18-20 years. The experimenter was seated at a distance of 2.7 meters
 from six targets, blue, red, and green discs positioned at eye height (each with
 a diameter of 17.8 centimeters), placed facing the participants, equidistant to
 the left and the right of the midline. These distances were similar to those
 that had been used with babies by Butterworth (1991). Twelve participants
 were tested at each angular separation between targets of 4, 6, 8, 10, 15, and
 45 degrees, and each was tested when seated both to the left and to the right
 of the experimenter. There were four conditions for each angle of target
 separation: (i) the experimenter pointing with the right hand, with head and
 eye movements (P + H + E); (ii) head and eye movements alone (H +

 154

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 E); (iii) eye movements alone (E); and (iv) head movements alone, with the
 experimenter wearing dark sunglasses (H + S). The participant simply had
 to state the color and side (left or right) of the disc being designated.

 Adults were accurate as to the side of the visual field to which reference

 was being made. Within each hemifield, and whatever the type of signal, they
 were almost completely accurate with spatial separations of 45 degrees. Errors
 began to be made at 15 degrees target separation, and performance was inac-
 curate in more than 50% of participants at or below 10 degrees of spatial
 separation. Pointing (P + H + E) assisted in improving accuracy most for
 the target located in the extreme right periphery (perhaps because all point-
 ing was carried out right-handed). However, it did not increase accuracy for
 the intermediate targets within either visual hemifield. In general, head
 movements with sunglasses (E + S) were more accurate than head move-
 ments with eye movements (H + E), which was interesting since this sug-
 gested that the motion of the spectacle frame was assisting the observer to
 localize the referent. Eye movements alone (E) gave the widest spread of
 error among the internal targets in each hemifield and the lowest correct
 identification of targets at the periphery.

 These results suggest that, for adults, right-handed pointing assists in
 accurately localizing a target placed at the right periphery of a set of alterna-
 tives. In fact, all four signal types carried information for the periphery, with
 eye movements alone being the least useful in a crowded environment. Local-
 ization of targets through pointing did not depend on extrapolating precise
 linear vectors through visual space since, at separations of 10 degrees or less,
 adults were likely to choose an incorrect target in the intermediate positions
 and they were correct only for the most peripheral targets on each side. This
 suggests that target selection occurred in broad zones specified by each type
 of signal. Pointing was the most effective cue to direct adults' attention to
 targets in the extreme periphery, especially when the angular separation was
 very small (4, 6, or 8 degrees). Eye movements alone were less effective than
 head and eye movements or pointing in eliciting an accurate response. This
 might be because eye movements can specify only a relatively broad region
 of space for an observer, to the left or the right (and perhaps in the vertical
 plane), whereas the larger-scale orienting movements involving head, hand,
 and eye may be less ambiguous. Such a limitation on the spatial informa-
 tiveness of another's eye movements may explain why it is relatively difficult
 to find evidence for eye movements alone being effective in joint attention
 before about 18 months (Butterworth & Jarrett, 1991; Corkum & Moore,
 1995). It also explains why other postural subsystems, such as the extended
 arm and index finger, are necessarily involved in precise referential commu-
 nication since the pointing gesture increases the efficiency of joint attention
 to the periphery.

 A similar study with children aged 4 years compared accuracy of target

 155

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 localization at 10-degree separations with head movements and pointing,
 head and eye movements, eye orientation alone, or head orientation alone
 (Butterworth, 1997a). In this study, the children were accurate only to the
 peripheral targets and only when the signal included pointing. These findings
 suggest that, in the absence of object-specific factors that differentiate possi-
 ble referents from each other, absolute accuracy of reference does not occur,
 either among babies, children, or adults, in cluttered environments. This
 leads to the hypothesis that the "ecological" mechanism must necessarily col-
 laborate with the "geometric" mechanism if a specific referent is to be suc-
 cessfully singled out. This has particularly important implications for lan-
 guage acquisition since, unlike the verbally fluent adult, the preverbal child
 cannot rely on the adult's speech to disambiguate the intended referent.
 Rather, the nonverbal referential actions of the adult must serve, in collabora-
 tion with the structure of the environment, to assist the infant identify the
 referent so that referential communication through speech can begin.

 The conclusion from these studies is that babies, children, and adults
 are partially dependent on target qualities to identify the specific referent of
 the gaze or pointing signal. That is, joint visual attention is a two-part process,
 one part being specified by change in gaze or postural orientation, which
 define the broad zones of visual space likely to be of mutual interest, and
 the other part depending on the object to single itself out in a crowded envi-
 ronment. Thus, what attracts the adult's attention and leads her to turn even-
 tually also captures the infant's attention and enables a meeting of minds at
 the location of the object. Head and eye movements, which are understood
 as referential actions from early in development, come to be supplemented
 by the pointing gesture, which carries attention further into the periphery
 once the infant can integrate experience across the greater distances in-
 volved. The pointing gesture is more effective than head and eyes alone in
 carrying attention to the extreme periphery, especially when the environment
 is crowded. This account of the developmental transition to pointing does
 not preclude the possibility that older babies attribute intentions to others,
 but it does not require the infant to make such attributions. The infant's
 ability to integrate experience across larger and larger spatiotemporal inter-
 vals may be sufficient for the well-attested changes in joint attention that be-
 gin at about 9 months and that herald the comprehension and production
 of pointing.

 Pointing Comprehension

 Detailed naturalistic studies are needed to establish exactly how babies
 come to comprehend the pointing signal itself. Butterworth and Grover
 (1988, 1989) showed that pointing was understood by 12 months, which

 156

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 agrees closely with Carpenter et al.'s age of 11.7 months for pointing compre-
 hension. Butterworth and Grover (1988) found that infants at 6 or 9 months
 were as likely to fixate the pointing hand as the designated target. If babies
 at 6 and 9 months succeeded in fixating the target, they did so in two steps,
 pausing first at the adult's hand, then alighting on the target, whereas 12-
 month-old babies looked to the target rapidly and smoothly. Indeed, it has
 sometimes been noted that mothers go to a great deal of trouble, with exag-
 gerated hand movements, to lead the young infant's gaze from her hand to
 the target (Murphy & Messer, 1977). Grover (1988) showed that the infant's
 latency to fixate the correct target significantly decreases between 9 and 12
 months. She also showed that manual pointing is a more potent signal than
 a simple change in head and eye orientation. At 12 months, babies were sig-
 nificantly more likely to respond when the signal included a point and more
 likely to fixate a target further into the periphery of vision, even if this meant
 ignoring an identical target seen earlier along their scan path.

 Ecological factors also influenced the form and incidence of the infant's
 response to pointing. The likelihood of a response to pointing increased from
 69% to 80% of trials when the number of targets in the field of view was
 increased from one to two. When the salience of the targets was experimen-
 tally manipulated by setting them in motion, either singly or in pairs, the
 infant's response to pointing increased to ceiling level. Target motion was
 sufficient to eliminate fixation on the pointing hand in 9-month-old infants,
 although babies then went on to fixate only the first target along their scan
 path from the adult's hand. Thus, attention may be "plucked" from the hand
 to the object by the attention-worthy properties of the object itself, which
 alert the baby to the referential significance of the manual gesture (Grover,
 1988).

 By 15 months, however, babies will sometimes alight on the second, more

 peripheral target in a sequence of fixations. Thus, by this age, infants were
 not merely fixating the first object that they encountered along the line from
 the adult's hand. Rather, they appear to be extrapolating along the pointing
 arm (often before the pointing arm comes to rest in a stationary posture)
 until their own gaze arrives in the more peripheral region of visual space.
 Once there, babies search for the potential object of joint attention by scan-
 ning between the potential (identical) targets or by singling out the most
 attention-worthy thing. It is possible that the infant's relative familiarity with
 the target contributes to the process of achieving joint visual attention. It
 might be predicted that babies would be more likely to attend to a novel item
 if such a target is encountered in an otherwise familiar setting. Studies varying
 the novelty of the objects for joint attention have not yet, however, been pub-
 lished.

 Other cognitive processes have been postulated in pointing comprehen-
 sion. Piaget (1954) noted that babies who do not search manually for hidden

 157

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 objects before about 9 months do not comprehend telltale signs that an ob-
 ject has been hidden at a particular place, such as bumps in the cloth oc-
 cluder. He traced the beginnings of signification, the "semiotic function," to
 the period 9-12 months and related it to object permanence. It is interesting,
 therefore, that Carpenter et al. found the relation between object perma-
 nence and communication development to be less direct than is the range
 of social-cognitive skills. Perhaps the signal function of pointing is somehow
 inherent to the social aspects of the gesture? Butterworth (1997b, 1998) has
 argued that manual pointing is a species-typical signal in which a part of the
 body (the hand and arm) substitutes for the whole-body-orienting move-
 ments observed in other species. This implies that, as manual signification,
 pointing depends on a part-whole analysis in which the pointing hand takes
 on the signal function that until then has been served by the postural com-
 plex of head, eyes, and trunk. Furthermore, such an analysis gives renewed
 significance to the anatomical aspects of achieving joint visual attention
 through bodily reorientation. On this view, cognitive development operates
 in collaboration with perception and action in species-typical fashion to un-
 derpin the comprehension and production of pointing.

 The Production of Pointing

 The onset of pointing production is also subject to vagaries of estimation,
 although the range is less extreme than for joint visual attention. For clarity,
 pointing is here defined as extending the index finger and the arm, with the
 remaining fingers curled toward the palm and the thumb tucked in. A num-
 ber of studies now converge on the emergence of canonical pointing at an
 average age of 11-12 months, although babies as young as 81/2 months have
 been observed to point and there are precursors in the manual actions of
 babies even younger (Butterworth & Morissette, 1996; Fogel & Hannan, 1985;
 Schaffer, 1984). About 33% of parents of 8-month-old babies in the Mac-
 Arthur study state that their babies already point (L. Fenson, 1997, personal
 communication; Fenson et al., 1994). Carpenter et al. did not observe proxi-
 mal pointing, but they found that distal pointing occurred on average at 12.6
 months, with no sex differences in their sample of 24 infants.

 In a similar longitudinal study of 27 babies, Butterworth and Morissette

 (1996) found pointing production onset to be in the 11th month. There was
 a not quite significant sex difference in average age of onset of 11.2 months
 for females and 11.7 months for males. However, the sample size may not
 have been sufficiently large to offer the power needed reliably to detect the
 sex difference. In the standardization sample for the MacArthur test, with 60
 children at each month, Fenson (1997, personal communication) found an
 accelerated pointing onset for female babies until 12 months, when the num-

 158

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 ber of males who are said to point catches up. Sex differences in pointing
 onset could have important implications for understanding female advantage
 in aspects of language acquisition, further strengthening the link between
 joint visual attention and communication development.

 As Carpenter et al. suggest, it is possible that comprehension of pointing

 (which they found as early as 11.7 months) may precede the production of
 pointing (which they found on average at 12.6 months). However, differential
 timing may simply reflect relative lack of knowledge about the antecedents
 of pointing production. Possible antecedents of pointing have been observed
 in the isolated extensions of the index finger of the 3-month-old baby that
 occur in close association with "speech-like" sounds in the infant engaged
 in social interaction (Fogel & Hannan, 1985; Masataka, 1995). Thus, it is pos-
 sible that components of the pointing gesture that are particularly closely
 linked to syllabic vocalization can be observed very early in development and
 that pointing production is actually developing in parallel with comprehen-
 sion.

 There are also isolated reports that babies can sometimes be observed
 making pointing movements before they engage in pointing for others. Such
 phenomena may be involuntary orienting movements or expressions of inter-
 est that are perhaps related to the transitional phenomena observed by
 Franco and Butterworth (1996). Babies at 10 months sometimes point at an
 object, then turn to the mother as if to check, and then point at her. It is as if
 two preexisting but separate streams of behavior, visual checking and manual
 pointing, are now coming together in a new structure, one that is not fully
 sequentially organized.

 Franco and Butterworth (1996) also found that further changes in the
 timing of checking occurred in relation to pointing. When babies first point,
 checking follows the gesture, whereas, by 16 months, they will first check to
 establish that they have the attention of the adult and only then point. Thus,
 there seems to arise an increasing flexibility in the sequential organization
 of checking and pointing that is consistent with developing intentionality.

 Franco and Butterworth (1996) tested the Vygotskian hypothesis that

 pointing begins as an imperative gesture and only later comes to be socialized
 as a declarative gesture. Vygotsky argued that pointing develops out of
 failed grasping movements that become ritualized through social interaction
 with the mother. Franco and Butterworth (1996) compared the incidence
 of pointing and reaching gestures in 10-14-month-old babies in declarative
 and imperative communicative contexts. Pointing was never confused with
 reaching gestures. Pointing occurred primarily to distal targets and was ac-
 companied by checking with the partner. Checking accompanied by point-
 ing increased exponentially with age, thus revealing communicative intent.
 Reaching gestures were not strongly correlated with checking. These findings
 run against the ritualization view of the origins of pointing as propounded

 159

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 by Vygotsky (1988) since pointing was not derived from failed grasping. On
 the other hand, they are consistent with Carpenter et al. insofar as there was
 no evidence for the primacy of the imperative use of pointing, which Carpen-
 ter et al. observed at 14 months, a few weeks after the emergence of clearly
 declarative points, at 12.6 months.

 Other studies investigated the social conditions for pointing (Franco &
 Butterworth, 1990). Pointing occurred only under conditions where a social
 partner was available for communication. Furthermore, pointing by the baby
 did not require that the adult also point, nor was the rate of infant pointing
 a function of the adult rate. That is, infant pointing implies an audience,
 even if the partner is another baby, but the incidence of pointing by the
 infant was not a function of whether the partner also pointed (Franco, Per-
 ruchini, & Butterworth, 1992). This evidence runs against the view that point-
 ing is at first performed primarily for the self since it was accompanied by
 checking with the partner, who had to be present (Werner & Kaplan, 1963).
 Nor does it support the speculation that distal pointing is a conventional ges-
 ture developed by imitation of the mother, as suggested by Carpenter et al.

 The results of Franco and Butterworth (1996) agree with Carpenter et
 al. that the pointing gesture in humans initially serves a protodeclarative pur-
 pose (i.e., look at that) rather than a protoimperative purpose (i.e., give me
 that). That is not to say that pointing has nothing at all to do with prehension,
 however, and this is where a radical alternative to the intentional stance, the
 ritualization, and the social transmission theories of pointing will be offered.

 The argument to be advanced is that pointing and the pincer grip are

 coevolved but that these are different aspects of hand function that are spe-
 cialized, respectively, for precise instrumental action and for precise commu-
 nication (see Butterworth, 1997b, 1998). The characteristic hand posture ob-
 served in human pointing may be related to the pincer grip but as its
 "antithesis." Darwin (1904) first proposed the principle of antithesis to ex-
 plain how animal communication often exploits visual signals to convey infor-
 mation. For example, an animal may signal readiness to attack by making
 "intention movements" that are preparatory to fighting. After a fight, the
 subdued posture of the defeated dog signals submission because the muscles
 are activated in the opposite configuration, or antithesis, to those involved
 in aggression. The opposition of the tip of the index finger and thumb in
 the pincer grip is postulated here to have pointing as its postural antithesis.
 This contrast in relative positions of index finger and thumb also involves a
 change in the focus of visual attention. In precise manual activities with tools,
 focal attention is on the hand, the tool, and the object in the service of precise
 control of manipulation. In pointing, by contrast, attention is outer directed
 and serves rather precisely to reorient the attention of another person so that
 an object at some distance can become a focus for shared experience.

 On this theory, the emergence of pointing should be related to the devel-

 160

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 opment of other precise uses of the hand, and this, indeed, is what Butter-
 worth and Morissette (1996) established. The pincer grip was invariably in
 the infant's repertoire approximately 1 month before pointing onset. Explo-
 ration of objects with the tip of the index finger (tipping) has also been
 linked to the onset of pointing (Shinn, 1900). Butterworth, Verweij, and Hop-
 kins (1997) showed that "tipping" and the pincer grip are closely related in
 development, with the incidence of tipping declining as the pincer grip be-
 comes established.

 In summary, the theory that pointing develops at the same time as pre-

 cise manual actions links pointing onset to "instrumental intentionality,"
 which stresses less the purely cognitive aspects of the intentional stance.
 Species-specific aspects of hand anatomy and function, and the underlying
 processes for focused attention, are used in "antithesis" to support precise
 communication. On this argument, precise tool use and precise manual com-
 munication through the pointing gesture are coevolved, species-specific func-
 tions of the human hand.

 Pointing and the Transition to Language

 A variety of studies have linked preverbal referential communication with

 language acquisition (e.g., Baldwin, 1991, 1993). There is evidence that the
 amount of pointing at 12 months predicts speech production rates at 24
 months (Camaioni, Castelli, Longobardi, & Volterra, 1991). Links between
 pointing onset and comprehension of object names have also been estab-
 lished, with infants understanding their first categorical object name in the
 same week as they point, which incidentally introduces yet another cognitive
 process, categorization, into the many factors involved in the emergence of
 referential communication (Harris, Barlow-Brown, & Chasin, 1995). Carpen-
 ter et al.'s study also adds important new information on the relation between
 persistent joint engagement. Maternal language following into the infant's
 focus of attention is the most important link with subsequent speech compre-
 hension and production, but it should be noted that, for maternal following
 in to be effective, the joint visual attention system must already be operating
 reciprocally between mother and baby. After all, the mother already speaks
 the language, and it is therefore logical that the direction of transmission will
 be from her to the child. The duration of joint engagement proved diagnos-
 tic, and the joint visual attention window around 14 months seems particu-
 larly important for subsequent speech production. The question is whether
 there may be specific developmental changes in the baby at around this age
 that support the acquisition of speech.

 Butterworth and Morissette (1996) studied the relation between age of
 pointing onset and the subsequent comprehension and production of speech

 161

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 and gestures. A longitudinal study was carried out linking pointing, handed-
 ness, and onset of the pincer grip to early verbal and gestural communication,
 as measured by the MacArthur infant language inventory (Fenson et al.,
 1994). The earlier the onset of pointing, the greater were the number of
 different gestures produced, and the greater the number of animal sounds
 comprehended, at 14.4 months. That is, age of pointing onset appears to be
 related both to a gesture and to an auditory-vocal developmental pathway.
 The relative balance of use between left and right hands in unimanual tasks
 predicted MacArthur speech production and comprehension scores at 14.4
 months. Girls showed more right-handed pointing than boys. The amount
 of right-handed pointing, and the relative balance of pincer grips between
 the left and the right hands (a measure of lateralized fine motor control),
 predicted speech comprehension and production at 14.4 months. Bimanual
 use of the hands, terminating in right-handed object retrieval, was signifi-
 cantly correlated with MacArthur speech production at 14.4 months. At this
 age, boys had relatively few words in production (about three), whereas girls
 had on average 12 words. Although the study stopped before 15 months,
 there is evidence from the MacArthur norms that, by 16 months, the sex
 difference in rate of speech production is marked. At 16 months, females
 have 95 words in production and males 25 words, although the sex difference
 begins to even out by 20 months (Fenson et al., 1994).

 Thus, earlier onset of pointing, earlier right-handed pointing, and more
 rapid development of speech in girls may suggest that there is a link between
 pointing, cerebral lateralization, and the development of language and that
 there may be sex differences in this process. Carpenter et al. admit that a
 number of such language-relevant processes were not measured, and, clearly,
 there are limits to what can be done in any study. However, this sort of detail
 is needed to flesh out a viable theory of communication development that is
 based on the combined contributions of species-typical perception, action,
 and cognitive systems.

 Conclusion

 Carpenter et al. have presented important new information to show that
 joint visual attention is indeed related to the acquisition of language. The
 main purpose of this Commentary has been to propose an amended time-
 table for the origins of joint visual attention and to offer some theoretical
 alternatives for the development of pointing. First, and most important, in-
 fants are capable of joint attention in the period before comprehension and
 production of pointing even if this is not a robust ability. Second, relying on
 the intentional stance for theoretical unification of the data does not really
 solve the problem of defining intentionality. It was argued that there is no

 162

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 "graduation ceremony" for acquiring intentionality that is necessary and suf-
 ficient for communication development. A purely cognitive approach, per-
 haps inadvertently, downgrades the contribution made by perception and ac-
 tion systems to joint attention, to categorization, and to other precursors of
 speech (Rakison & Butterworth, 1998). Other species-typical aspects of hu-
 man embodiment, such as lateralization or the development of precision
 grips, give rise to relations between motor control and communication devel-
 opment that also tend to be excluded. Although pointing is a simple, social
 means of reorienting attention, it is also intimately connected with species-
 typical right-handedness, which undergoes systematic, gender-linked changes
 in the period from 9 to 15 months. Thus, communication by means of the
 pointing gesture may make use of the same anatomical adaptations and atten-
 tion mechanisms that serve precise tool use through the pincer grip. Pointing
 serves to identify the concurrent sound stream with a visual referent and
 thereby effects a link between the intentional objects of joint visual attention,
 language, and culture.

 References

 Baldwin, D. (1991). Infants' contribution to the achievement ofjoint reference. Child Develop-

 ment, 62, 875-890.

 Baldwin, D. (1993). Early referential understanding: Infants' ability to recognize referential

 acts for what they are. Developmental Psychology, 29(5), 832-843.

 Baldwin, D. A., & Moses, L. J. (1996). The ontogeny of social information gathering. Child

 Development, 67(5), 1915-1939.

 Bower, T. G. R., Broughton, J. M., & Moore, M. K. (1970). Demonstration of intention in

 the reaching behavior of neonate humans. Nature, 228, 679-681.

 Butterworth, G. E. (1987). Some benefits of egocentrism. In J. S. Bruner & H. Weinreich-

 Haste (Eds.), Making sense of the world: The child's construction of reality. London: Methuen.
 Butterworth, G. E. (1991, April). Evidence for the "geometric" comprehension of manual pointing.

 Paper presented at the meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development, Se-
 attle.

 Butterworth, G. E. (1997a, December). Did humans evolve pointing because gaze is not enough?

 Paper presented at the conference of the British Psychological Society, London.

 Butterworth, G. E. (1997b). Starting point. Natural History, 106(4), 14-16.
 Butterworth, G. E. (1998). What is special about pointing? In F. Simion & G. E. Butterworth

 (Eds.), The development of sensory motor and cognitive capacities in early infancy: From perception
 to cognition. Hove: Psychology Press.

 Butterworth, G. E. (in press). Neonatal imitation: Existence, mechanisms, motives. In J. Na-
 del & G. E. Butterworth (Eds.), Imitation in infancy. Cambridge: Cambridge University
 Press, in press.

 Butterworth, G. E., & Cochran, E. (1980). Towards a mechanism of joint visual attention in

 human infancy. International Journal of Behavioural Development, 3, 253-272.

 Butterworth, G. E., & Grover, L. (1988). The origins of referential communication in human
 infancy. In L. Weiskrantz (Ed.), Thought without language. Oxford: Oxford University
 Press.

 Butterworth, G. E., & Grover, L. (1989).Joint visual attention, manual pointing and preverbal

 163

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 communication in human infancy. In M. Jeannerod (Ed.), Attention and Performance XII.
 Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Butterworth, G. E., & Hopkins, B. (1989). Hand-mouth co-ordination in the newborn human

 infant. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 6(4), 303-314.

 Butterworth, G. E., & Jarrett, N. L. M. (1991). What minds have in common is space: Spatial

 mechanisms for perspective taking in infancy. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
 9, 55-72.

 Butterworth, G. E., & Morissette, P. (1996). Onset of pointing and the acquisition of language

 in infancy. Journal of Reproductive and Infant Psychology, 14, 219-231.

 Butterworth, G. E., Verweij, E., & Hopkins, B. (1997). The development of prehension in

 infants: Halverson revisited. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 15, 223-236.

 Camaioni, L., Castelli, M. C., Longobardi, E., & Volterra, V. (1991). A parent report instru-

 ment for early language assessment. First Language, 11, 345-360.

 Campos, J. J., Barrett, K. C., Lamb, M. E., Hill, H., Goldsmith, H., & Stenberg, C. (1983).

 Socio-emotional development. In M. M. Haith & J. J. Campos (Eds), P. Mussen (Series
 Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Infancy and developmental psychobiology. New York:
 Wiley.

 Caron, A., Krakowski, O., Liu, A., & Brooks, R. (1996, April). Infant joint attention: Cued orient-
 ing or implicit theory of mind? Paper presented at the International Conference on Infant
 Studies, Providence, RI.

 Collis, G. (1977). Visual co-orientation and maternal speech. In H. R. Schaffer (Ed.), Studies

 in mother infant interaction. New York: Academic.

 Corkum, V., & Moore, C. (1995). The origins of joint visual attention. In C. Moore & P.
 Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Darwin, C. (1904). The expression of the emotions in men and animals. London: John Murray.

 (Original work published 1872)

 Dennett, D. (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 D'Entremont, B., Hains, S. M. J., & Muir, D. W. (1997). A demonstration of gaze following

 in 3 to 6 month olds. Infant Behavior and Development, 20(4), 569-572.

 Diamond, A. (1991). Frontal lobe involvement in cognitive changes during the first year of
 life. In K. R. Gibson & A. C. Petersen (Eds.), Brain maturation and cognitive development:
 Comparative and cross-cultural perspectives. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.

 Diamond, A., Werker, J. F., & Lalonde, C. (1994). Toward understanding commonalities in
 the development of object search, detour navigation, categorization and speech percep-
 tion. In G. Dawson & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Human behavior and the developing brain. New
 York: Guilford.

 Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S.., Bates, E., Thal, D. J., & Pethick, S. J. (1994). Variability

 in early communicative development. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Develop-
 ment, 59(5, Serial No. 242).

 Fogel, A., & Hannan, T. E. (1985). Manual actions of nine to fifteen week old human infants

 during face to face interaction with their mothers. Child Development, 56, 1271-1279.

 Franco, F., & Butterworth, G. E. (1990, August). Effects of social variables on the production of
 infant pointing. Poster presented at the Fourth European Conference on Developmental
 Psychology, University of Stirling.

 Franco, F., & Butterworth, G. E. (1996). Pointing and social awareness: Declaring and re-

 questing in the second year of life. Journal of Child Language, 23(2), 307-336.

 Franco, F., Perruchini, P., & Butterworth, G. (1992, September). Pointing for an age mate in

 1 to 2 year olds. Paper presented at the Sixth European Conference on Developmental
 Psychology, Seville.

 Gibson, E., & Rader, N. (1979). Attention: The perceiver as performer. In G. A. Hale & M.

 Lewis (Eds.), Attention and cognitive development. New York: Plenum.

 164

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 Grover, L. (1988). Comprehension of the pointing gesture in human infants. Unpublished Ph.D.

 dissertation, University of Southampton.

 Harris, M., Barlow-Brown, F., & Chasin, J. (1995). Early referential understanding. First Lan-

 guage, 15(pt. 1, no. 43), 19-34.

 Hood, B., Willen, J. D., & Driver, J. (1998). Adult's eyes trigger shifts of visual attention in

 human infants. Psychological Science, 9, 131-134.

 Itakura, S., & Butterworth, G. E. (1997, April). Role of head, eyes and pointing in joint visual

 attention. Poster presented at the meeting of the Society for Research in Child Develop-
 ment, Washington DC.

 Kalnins, I. V., & Bruner, J. S. (1974). Infant sucking used to change the clarity of a visual
 display. In J. Stone, H. T. Smith, & L. B. Murphy (Eds.), The competent infant. London:
 Tavistock.

 Lempers, J. D. (1976). Production of pointing, comprehension of pointing and understanding of
 looking behavior in young children. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Minne-
 sota.

 Lew, A., & Butterworth, G. E. (1995). Hand-mouth contact in newborn babies before and

 after feeding. Developmental Psychology, 31(3), 456-463.

 Lew, A., & Butterworth, G. E. (1997). The development of hand-mouth co-ordination in 2
 to 5 month old infants: Similarities with reaching and grasping. Infant Behavior and Devel-
 opment, 20, 159-169.

 Masataka, N. (1995). The relation between index-finger extension and the acoustic quality

 of cooing in three month old infants. Journal of Child Language, 22, 247-257.

 Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of others: Re-enactment of intended

 acts by 18 month old children. Developmental Psychology, 31(5), 1-16.

 Millar, W. S., & Schaffer, H. R. (1972). The influence of spatially displaced visual feedback

 on infant operant conditioning. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 14, 442-452.

 Millar, W. S., & Schaffer, H. R. (1973). Visual manipulative response strategies in infant

 operant conditioning with spatially displaced feedback. British Journal of Psychology, 64,
 545-552.

 Moore, C., & Corkum, V. (1994). Social understanding at the end of the first year of life.

 Developmental Review, 14, 349-372.

 Morissette, P., Ricard, M., & Gouin-Decarie, T. (1995).Joint visual attention and pointing in
 infancy: A longitudinal study of comprehension. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
 13(2), 163-177.

 Murphy, C. M., & Messer, D. J. (1977). Mothers, infants and pointing: A study of gesture.

 In H. R. Schaffer (Ed.), Studies of mother infant interaction. London: Academic.

 Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children. New York: Norton.
 Piaget, J. (1954). The construction of reality in the child. New York: Basic.
 Rakison, D., & Butterworth, G. E. (1998). Infants' use of object parts in early categorization.

 Developmental Psychology, 34(1), 49-62.

 Scaife, M., & Bruner, J. S. (1975). The capacity for joint attention in the infant. Nature, 253,

 265-266.

 Schaffer, H. R. (1984) The child's entry into a social world. New York: Academic.
 Shinn, M. (1900). The biography of a baby. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
 Tomasello, M., & Call, J. (1997). Primate cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Trevarthen, C. (1990). Growth and education in the hemispheres. In C. Trevarthen (Ed.),

 Brain circuits and functions of the mind: Essays in honor of Roger W. Sperry. Cambridge: Cam-
 bridge University Press.

 Vedeler, D. (1994). Infant intentionality as object directedness: A method for observation.

 Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 35, 343-366.

 Von Hofsten, C. (1990). Development of manipulation action in infancy. In H. Bloch & B. I.

 165

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 Bertenthal (Eds.), Sensory-motor organizations and development in infancy and early childhood.
 Dordrecht: Kluwer.

 Vygotsky, L. S. (1988). Development of the higher mental functions. In K. Richardson & S.

 Sheldon (Eds.), Cognitive development to adolescence. Hove: Erlbaum. (Original work pub-
 lished 1931)

 Werner, H., & Kaplan, B. (1963). Symbol formation: An organismic-developmental approach to

 language and the expression of thought. New York: Wiley.

 166

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 COMMENTARY

 SOCIAL COGNITION IN INFANCY

 Chris Moore

 Social Cognition in Infancy

 For anyone interested in the social developments of the second half of
 infancy, the Monograph by Carpenter, Nagell, and Tomasello will be a pleasure
 to read. It undoubtedly provides the richest longitudinal description available
 of the development of social interactive behavior during approximately 8
 months spanning the end of the first year of life. These behaviors serve as a
 fundamental context for much of the social communicative developments to
 come (Carpenter et al. show how early language is grounded in this context),
 and as such their description is immensely valuable. However, I use the term
 description advisedly here, for, while I believe that these data provide a rich
 texture for thinking about social development during this period, they ulti-
 mately tell us little definitively about the cognitive processes involved in these
 behaviors.

 In this Commentary, I will focus on the theoretical account that the au-

 thors believe to be supported by these data. The title of the Monograph boldly
 asserts Carpenter et al.'s theoretical leanings: "Social Cognition. .. ." In addi-
 tion to mapping out the development of the social interactive skills of the
 infant during the second half of infancy, Carpenter et al. want to make claims
 about infant social cognition. Their belief is that the pattern of evidence is
 consistent, indeed supports, the interpretation that infants have a concept of

 Preparation of this commentary was supported by grant 410-95-1144 from the Social
 Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. Correspondence should be addressed
 to Chris Moore, Department of Psychology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Can-
 ada, B3H 4J1.

 167

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 intentional agent and that this understanding develops by analogy from their
 awareness of their own intentional action. I will examine this interpretation,
 first, by considering whether the pattern of data does indeed provide support
 for Carpenter et al.'s claims for infant social cognition and, second, by exam-
 ining their account of infant social cognition in the context of a more general
 consideration of infant cognition.

 Theory and Data

 Carpenter et al. propose that the behavior of infants around 12 months

 of age is based on the infants having a concept of an intentional agent. An
 intentional agent acts in relation to goals and has perceptual and emotional
 experience in relation to objects and states of affairs in the world. An inten-
 tional agent, then, is an entity that has both an objective identity (or who
 exists as an independent entity in a world of objects) and subjective experi-
 ence (or for whom there are goals and objects with intentional inexistence).
 Because both self and others are members of the category intentional agent,
 having a concept of an intentional agent means appreciating the equivalence
 of self and other as agents who can take up intentional relations to objects
 or states of affairs. Significantly, such a conception of intentional agents is
 an individualistic one whereby agents are recognized to be individual centers
 of action and experience in relation to the world.

 So what aspects of their data convince Carpenter et al. that an explana-
 tion in terms of the concept intentional agent is warranted? The reliable emer-
 gence of the social interactive phenomena without a coherent association
 with such object-related skills as object permanence and spatial relations im-
 plies to Carpenter et al. that "some specifically social developments" are re-
 sponsible. While it is plausible to suggest that there is something intrinsically
 social about whatever is changing during this period, the inference that it is
 conceptual change in the area of intentional understanding is of course not
 necessary. The latter component rests more on the authors' interpretation
 of other types of evidence, in particular the reliable sequencing of types of
 skills and the patterns of gaze shown by infants.

 Carpenter et al. are quite taken by the uniformity of the developmental

 picture. Because the various behavioral phenomena-joint engagement, at-
 tention and behavior following, attention and behavior directing-all emerge
 within a relatively short space of time and in a largely reliable sequence, it
 makes sense to postulate a single underlying change in development responsi-
 ble for the overt behavioral changes. As such, the notion of a conceptual
 change is appealing. This change is not all or none. Carpenter et al. propose
 that the sequence from joint engagement and proximal declarative gestures
 to behavior following and distal gestures is the product of the infant, first,

 168

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 constructing the notion that others have intentions and, next, discovering
 what those intentions are about.

 However, the proximal-distal sequence observed by Carpenter et al. is

 relatively straightforwardly interpreted without an attribution to infants of a
 concept of intentional agent of either the that or the what form. The sequence
 implies that infants first engage in triadic interactions when the object and
 adult are simultaneously part of perceptual experience. Such situations will
 inevitably place rather fewer demands on attentional resources than those in
 which the infant has to shift attention between objects that cannot be simulta-
 neously within the visual field. In fact, a similar distinction appears to exist
 for gaze following, in that there is evidence that infants will follow gaze to a
 target that is within the visual field somewhat earlier than they will follow gaze
 to targets outside the visual field (Butterworth &Jarrett, 1991; D'Entremont,
 Hains, & Muir, 1997; Moore, in press).

 Unfortunately, Carpenter et al. did not compare gaze following scenarios

 when the target was within or outside the visual field. However, there is some
 evidence in their work that is suggestive. In note 5, they report that the ages
 of onset of point and gaze following were significantly earlier to the left side
 of the room, which was closer to the infants, than they were to the right
 side of the room. Carpenter et al.'s suggested explanation for the reported
 proximal-distal difference in declarative gestures in terms of the distinction
 between understanding that and understanding what is seriously weakened if
 indeed there is an age-of-onset difference for proximal and distal gaze and
 point following.

 There are also some more specific aspects of the behavioral phenomena
 that at first gloss imply conceptual understanding of intentional agents. Car-
 penter et al. are particularly impressed by gaze alternation and "checking,"
 whereby the infant looks to the adult as if to determine what the latter's atten-
 tional or intentional orientation is. They suggest that such accompanying be-
 haviors indicate more than rote learning of gaze following and the like, that
 they imply an understanding of the adult's intentions. Carpenter et al. put
 so much store in these kinds of behaviors that, for them, these behaviors
 "ensured that children really understood the intentions or attention of their
 social partner for each skill measured."

 Personally, I find the use of gaze to faces to justify the notion of a concept
 of intentional agent unconvincing. In the first place, infants have been focus-
 ing their own attention on the faces of their interactive partners for some
 months prior to the onset of triadic interaction. Faces are salient stimuli from
 birth (e.g., Johnson, Dziurawiec, Ellis, & Morton, 1991) and play a significant
 role in the dyadic interactions evident from 2 months of age (e.g., Trevar-
 then, 1979). If we make the not unreasonable assumption that triadic inter-
 actions are developmentally continuous with these earlier face-to-face dyadic
 interactions, then there is no reason to imagine that infants would look any-

 169

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 where else when they look at adults. The point is that triadic interactions may
 be seen as dyadic interactions into which a third element has been intro-
 duced, so of course infants will look at the adults' faces during these inter-
 actions. But there is no more reason to infer an understanding of intentional
 agency from gazing at faces at this stage than there is for the 2-month-old.

 Now, clearly, it is not just that infants gaze at faces that is important; it
 is the pattern of facial gazing in association with other events, such as the
 adult blocking the infant's goal or the infant pointing at a target. It is appeal-
 ing to infer that an infant whose goal is blocked and looks up at the adult's
 face, or who points at something to the side of the room and then turns
 "expectantly" to look at the adult, is attempting to determine the adult's
 intentional or attentional state. However, I think that this kind of evidence
 is at best only circumstantial-it cannot tell us directly anything about what
 the infant is looking for. It is worth noting that, in the literature, one and
 the same pattern of gaze has been interpreted in quite opposite ways. For
 example, Franco and Butterworth (1996) interpret infant looks to the interac-
 tive partner after pointing as indicating that the infant is checking whether
 the adult has seen or looked toward the target. In contrast, we (Moore &
 Corkum, 1994) and others (e.g., Desrochers, Morissette, & Ricard, 1995) have
 suggested that such a pattern is more consistent with the infant expecting
 some response from the adult (see also Bates, Camaioni, & Volterra, 1975).
 In general, then, it is difficult to see how patterns of gaze alone can distin-
 guish between infants looking to see what the adult's intentional state is and
 infants simply shifting attention between object and adult because both are
 interesting sources of stimulation.

 In sum, while there is appeal to the explanatory use of conceptual devel-
 opment to account for the phenomena that are so well laid out by Carpenter
 et al., I believe that this appeal is largely illusory. However, if a concept of
 intentional agent is not particularly warranted by the evidence, how should
 one think about the developmental changes seen during this period? To an-
 swer this question, it is worth considering the nature of infant cognition in
 more general terms.

 The Nature of Infant Cognition

 There is a long tradition in the developmental literature in which a dis-

 tinction is made in type or level of cognition between infancy and the postin-
 fancy years. For Piaget (e.g., 1962), infancy was characterized by sensorimotor
 schema where action was organized with respect to immediate perceptual in-
 put. The end of infancy was marked by the development of conceptual
 schemas where action could be internalized into thought in such a way that
 actions no longer had to be performed but could now be imagined or repre-

 170

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 sented. In the more recent literature, a number of authors (e.g., Leslie, 1987;
 Olson, 1989, 1993; Perner, 1991) have argued that the end of infancy marks
 a watershed in cognition. While there are obviously differences between these
 authors' theoretical accounts, for all of them, infants are limited to basing
 action on a single representation, typically provided by immediate perceptual
 information. In a nutshell, the idea of infant cognition is that action is in
 response to immediate experience. The action that may be produced devel-
 ops in organization and complexity through the period of infancy, and it
 clearly is modified by previous experience, but, ultimately, the infant is lim-
 ited to dealing with information that is provided perceptually.

 With the end of infancy comes the cognitive capacity to attend to more
 than one thing at a time. Olson (1989, 1993) characterizes this capacity as
 being able to hold one thing in mind while attending perceptually to some-
 thing else. Perner (1991) talks of multiple models guiding action and Leslie
 (1987) of secondary representation. In each case, the idea is that action is
 no longer governed by the immediately provided experience but that the
 child can bring a different representation to bear on the determination of
 action. It is unfortunate that the language used by different authors does not
 allow a uniform labeling of the levels of cognition. For my purposes here,
 however, I shall refer to infant cognition as sensorimotor and postinfancy cogni-
 tion as imaginal.

 So how does the characterization of the cognitive development from in-
 fancy to the postinfancy period fit with the proposal of Carpenter et al.? Al-
 though they do not address the issue in these terms, I suggest that the kind
 of concept that they invoke to explain infant behavior in triadic interactions
 is not consistent with a sensorimotor level of cognition. Rather, it depends
 on an imaginal form. It is imaginal because, at the very least, attributing sub-
 jective experience to others and objective existence to self depends on an
 interpretation of perceptual experiences as something else. Thus, when I ob-
 serve another person turn his head and point, I attribute to that person atten-
 tion to an object in the world (i.e., I imagine information that is not given
 in my perceptual experience). At the same time, to interpret my own experi-
 ence as that of an independent intentional agent like those others I observe
 around me, I must imagine myself, as it were, from the outside. In short, the
 recognition of the equivalence of the third-person experience of another's
 intentional activity and of my own first-person experience when acting inten-
 tionally requires interpreting two very different kinds of experience as mani-
 festations of the same thing, namely, the intentional activity of an agent in
 relation to a goal or an object. And, in order to do such interpretation, imagi-
 nal information has to be involved. Thus, the concept intentional agent re-
 quires an imaginal level of cognition (see Barresi & Moore, 1996).

 Because Carpenter et al.'s account attributes to 12-month-olds a form
 of cognitive ability usually reserved for children at the end of infancy, I think

 171

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 that it is worth exploring the alternative in more detail. Can a sensorimotor
 account serve to explain the phenomena that Carpenter et al. report? I be-
 lieve that it can. The way to think about triadic interactive behavior is in terms
 of the infant's attention to people's activity and to the world of objects becom-
 ing coordinated. Critically, one must allow that infants can participate in so-
 cial interactive structures in which their attention to others' action is linked
 to their attention to other objects and events. From a Piagetian point of view,
 such linkages would be seen as the coordination of schemes. While I think
 that there is reason to believe that there may be some general developmental
 pacing (hence the general emergence at the end of the first year of life), I
 do not think that necessarily one should expect extremely high correlations
 between tasks in social and nonsocial domains. These tasks may make quite
 different demands on the infants' information-processing skills and motiva-
 tions. Indeed, given that the correlations between the social-cognitive tasks
 were quite low in some cases in Carpenter et al.'s study, to expect high corre-
 lations with tasks that are quite different in demands would be unreasonable.

 Because infants show both following and directing behaviors, one has to

 allow that the coordinating structures can operate in either direction so that,
 within such interactive structures, the observation of the partner's head turn
 or point is linked to the expectation that something of note is available in
 the corresponding location in space. In addition, the infant's own observation
 of something of interest leads her to perform a gesture with the expectation
 that the adult will then provide some interesting feedback. Notice that this
 type of interpretation is consistent with a sensorimotor level of cognition be-
 cause the infant is acting in relation to the currently experienced events and
 is not presumed to be interpreting either her own or another's behavior in
 terms of a concept.

 My view is that this kind of sensorimotor account of triadic interactions is
 preferable, not only because it is consistent with the kind of cognition usually
 ascribed to infants, but also because it provides a potential solution to how an
 individualistic conception of intentional agency is acquired. By this account,
 infants' initial participation in triadic interactions reflects an interpersonal
 level of understanding of intentional activity. It is interpersonal because the
 infant's participation in interactive events provides experiences in which the
 necessary components for understanding intentional relations to objects are
 present as a result of the participation. Thus, the infant has first-person expe-
 rience of goals and intentional objects and third-person experience of
 agentive action. However, because the infant is limited to acting in relation
 to immediately provided perceptual experience, intentional activity cannot
 be attributed independently to either self or other.

 With the end of infancy and the development of the imaginal level of

 cognition, these interactive experiences can form the foundation for the ac-
 quisition of an individualistic understanding of intentional activity. Now the

 172

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SOCIAL COGNITION

 first-person experience of goals and intentional objects can be represented
 as the intentions of self, and the third-person experience of the activity of
 others can be represented as their intentions toward goals. In short, both
 kinds of experience can be represented as the intentional activity of an agent
 in relation to a goal. It is worth noting, I think, that this account is truly
 Vygotskian because the proposal is that the initial level of understanding of
 intention is thoroughly interpersonal and that it becomes individualistic only
 later through interactive experience and the ability to reflect on those inter-
 active experiences.

 Final Note

 If older infants and young toddlers are different in their type of under-

 standing of intention, then it should be possible to demonstrate the differ-
 ence. Carpenter, Nagell, and Tomasello have provided us with a rich picture
 of the development of social communicative behavior in the latter half of
 infancy, and their work will provide a reference for thinking about sequence
 and developmental relations in this area. However, in the end, descriptive
 data of the kind that they provide will not allow us to decide issues of social
 cognition. What is needed is experimental evidence in which the behavior
 of children at the relevant ages is compared under different conditions. For
 example, we know that, when gaze-orientation cues are manipulated, 12-
 month-olds follow head orientation but pay little attention to eye direction,
 whereas, from 18 months, children will follow eye orientation (e.g., Butter-
 worth & Jarrett, 1991; Corkum & Moore, 1995; Moore & Corkum, in press).
 While not conclusive on its own, such evidence may, in combination with
 data from various manipulations, ultimately provide us with a clear picture
 of the nature of infant social cognition.

 References

 Barresi, J., & Moore, C. (1996). Intentional relations and social understanding. Behavioral

 and Brain Sciences, 19, 107-154.

 Bates, E., Camaioni, L., & Volterra, V. (1975). The acquisition of performatives prior to

 speech. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 21, 205-224.

 Butterworth, G., & Jarrett, N. (1991). What minds have in common is space: Spatial mecha-

 nisms serving joint visual attention in infancy. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
 9, 55-72.

 Corkum, V., & Moore, C. (1995). Development of joint visual attention in infants. In C.
 Moore & P. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development. Hillsdale,
 NJ: Erlbaum.

 D'Entremont, B., Hains, S., & Muir, D. (1997). A demonstration of gaze following in 3- to

 6-month-olds. Infant Behavior and Development, 20, 569-572.

 Desrochers, S., Morissette, P., & Ricard, M. (1995). Two perspectives on pointing in infancy.

 173

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 CARPENTER ET AL.

 In C. Moore & P. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development. Hills-
 dale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Franco, F., & Butterworth, G. (1996). Pointing and social awareness: Declaring and re-

 questing in the second year. Journal of Child Language, 23, 307-336.

 Johnson, M., Dziurawiec, S., Ellis, H., & Morton, J. (1991). Newborns' preferential tracking

 of face-like stimuli and its subsequent decline. Cognition, 40, 1-19.

 Leslie, A. (1987). Pretense and representation: The origins of "theory of mind." Psychological

 Review, 94, 412-426.

 Moore, C. (in press). Gaze following and the control of attention. In P. Rochat (Ed.), Infant

 social cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Moore, C., & Corkum, V. (1994). Social understanding at the end of the first year of life.

 Developmental Review, 14, 349-372.

 Moore, C., & Corkum, V. (in press). Infant gaze following based on eye direction. British

 Journal of Developmental Psychology.

 Olson, D. (1989). Making up your mind. Canadian Psychology, 30, 617-627.
 Olson, D. (1993). The development of representations: The origins of mental life. Canadian

 Psychology, 34, 293-306.

 Perner, J. (1991). Understanding the representational mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams, and imitation in childhood. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
 Trevarthen, C. (1979). Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A description of
 primary intersubjectivity. In M. Bullowa (Ed.), Before speech: The beginnings of interpersonal
 communication. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 174

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Mon, 08 Jun 2020 14:20:52 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

<<<<<<< HEAD

The ENd of Document.
=======

>>>>>>> 4b6d83505f38ee99db288849a2c8b69a8d07c211
