 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

Child Development, July/August 1999, Volume 70, Number 4, Pages 853–865

Theory of Mind, Emotion Understanding, Language, and Family 

Background: Individual Differences and Interrelations

Alexandra L. Cutting and Judy Dunn

Individual differences in young children’s social cognition were examined in 128 urban preschoolers from a
wide range of backgrounds. Comprehensive assessments were made of children’s false-belief understanding,
emotion understanding, language abilities, and family background information was collected via parent in-
terview. Individual differences in children’s understanding of false-belief and emotion were associated with
differences in language ability and with certain aspects of family background, in particular, parental occupa-
tional class and mothers’ education. The number of siblings that children had did not relate to their social cog-
nition. Individual differences in false-belief and emotion understanding were correlated, but these domains
did not contribute to each other independently of age, language ability, and family background. In fact, vari-
ance in family background only contributed 
 to false-belief understanding. The results suggest that
family background has a signiﬁcant impact on the development of theory of mind. The ﬁndings also suggest
that understanding of false-belief and understanding of emotion may be distinct aspects of social cognition in
young children.

uniquely

INTRODUCTION
It is now widely accepted that by 4 years of age most
normally developing children have acquired an un-
derstanding of mind. That is, they are able to under-
stand a person’s actions in terms of that person’s de-
sires, thoughts, beliefs (which may be true or false),
and  emotions  (for  reviews,  see  Astington,  1993;
Mitchell,  1997).  Much  of  the  work  in  this  area  has
been  concerned  with  normative  development  and
group means, focusing on the age at which children
develop a “theory of mind,” and the conditions under
which  they  are  able  to  display  it  (e.g.,  Freeman,
Lewis, & Doherty, 1991; Moses & Flavell, 1990; Sulli-
van & Winner, 1993). Although this has resulted in a
fairly  clear  understanding  of  what  constitutes  the
“normal development” of social cognition, two areas
within the ﬁeld remain neglected—individual differ-
ences and the effects of family background.

Individual Differences in Social Cognition

It is only in recent years that researchers have be-
gun  to  focus  on  individual  differences  in  children’s
understanding of belief and emotion, and the factors
associated with these differences (Dunn, Brown, Slom-
kowski, Tesla, & Youngblade, 1991; Jenkins & Asting-
ton, 1996). Yet an understanding of individual differ-
ences is essential if we are to discover the factors that
inﬂuence  development,  and  ultimately  the  mecha-
nisms involved (Astington, 1993; Bartsch & Estes, 1996).
Although few studies have speciﬁcally addressed the
issue  of  individual  differences,  several  factors  that

inﬂuence  theory  of  mind  development  have  been
identiﬁed. Two areas that have received particular at-
tention are the inﬂuences of family environment and
of language.

In one of the ﬁrst studies to examine individual dif-
ferences in social understanding, Dunn et al. (1991)
observed children aged 33 months at home with their
mother  and  siblings.  The  children  then  were  tested
for both false-belief understanding and emotion under-
standing (speciﬁcally, their ability to make inferences
about the relations between particular situations and
basic emotions) at 40 months. Clear associations were
found between family measures at 33 months (such
as  family  talk  about  feelings,  and  cooperation  be-
tween siblings) and both false-belief and emotion un-
derstanding at 40 months. In addition, individual dif-
ferences  in  social  pretend  play  with  mothers  and
siblings at 33 months related to social understanding
at  40  months  (Youngblade  &  Dunn,  1995).  Further
support  for  the  importance  of  family  environment
comes from recent studies that have found relations
between  performance  on  false-belief  tasks  and  the
size of a child’s family, and in particular the number
of siblings that a child has (Jenkins & Astington, 1996;
Lewis, Freeman, Kyriakidou, Maridaki-Kassotaki, &
Berridge, 1996; Perner, Ruffman, & Leekam, 1994).

A second area that has received attention in exam-
ining individual differences in theory of mind is that
of  language.  In  a  key  paper,  Happé  (1995)  showed

© 1999 by the Society for Research in Child Development, Inc.
All rights reserved. 0009-3920/99/7004-0004

 
 

854 Child Development

that verbal ability, as measured by the British Picture
Vocabulary  Scale  (BPVS,  a  test  of  receptive  vocabu-
lary), was clearly linked to ability to pass false-belief
tasks,  both  in  normally  developing  children  and  in
children  with  autism.  Jenkins  and  Astington  (1996)
replicated this effect using the Test of Early Language
Development  (Hresko,  Reid,  &  Hammill,  1981),  a
measure of overall language development, both ex-
pressive and receptive), ﬁnding a strong relation be-
tween  general  language  ability  and  false-belief  per-
formance. Children’s ability to pass a false-belief task
also  may  depend  upon  their  comprehension  of  the
narrative  involved  (Lewis,  Freeman,  Hagestadt,  &
Douglas,  1994).  In  addition  to  children’s  own  lan-
guage ability, the experience children have in partici-
pating  in  discourse  with  their  families  has  been  re-
lated to their theory of mind development (Dunn et
al., 1991; Welch-Ross, 1997). These experiments high-
light the fact that language and theory of mind are in-
timately related, but several questions remain to be
answered. In particular, it is not known whether cer-
tain  aspects  of  language  are  particularly  important
for theory of mind development, although arguments
have been put forward emphasizing the role of almost
every  aspect  of  language—from  syntax  (e.g.,  de  Vil-
liers, 1995; Feldman, 1988) to semantics (e.g., Moore,
Pure,  &  Furrow,  1990;  Olson,  1988)  and  pragmatics
(Baron-Cohen, 1988; Eisenmajer & Prior, 1991). The
issue of cause and effect also is unclear; language may
inﬂuence theory of mind development, the opposite
may be true, or they may inﬂuence each other. It also
has been argued that many theory of mind tests are
linguistically complex, which may in part account for
correlations between language ability and test perfor-
mance (e.g., Lewis & Osborne, 1990). Correlations be-
tween  language  ability  and  theory  of  mind  perfor-
mance  have  now  been  established,  however,  for  a
wide  range  of  theory  of  mind  measures,  some  less
verbal than others, so the linguistic demands of stan-
dard  tasks  are  unlikely  to  account  fully  for  correla-
tions between language ability and performance on
theory of mind tests.

Individual  differences  in  emotion  understanding
have been somewhat more researched than individual
differences  in  false-belief  understanding.  Individ-
ual  differences  in  children’s  understanding  of  emo-
tion,  as  indexed  by  their  talk  about  emotion,  have
been documented in children as young as 24 months
(Dunn, Bretherton, & Munn, 1987). Individual differ-
ences also have been identiﬁed in a variety of related
areas,  including  response  to  distress  (Cummings,
Hollenbeck,  Ianotti,  Radke-Yarrow,  &  Zahn-Waxler,
1986), comforting (Murphy, 1937), and understanding
of the causes of emotions (Denham, 1986) and also are

known to be stable over time (Brown & Dunn, 1996).
As with false-belief understanding, individual differ-
ences in emotion understanding have been related to
family environment, and also possibly to gender (see
Harris, 1994, for a review). In particular, family dis-
course and the quality of family interactions seem to
be important (Dunn et al., 1991).

The relation between understanding of false-belief
and  emotion  understanding  is  surprisingly  unclear,
despite the importance of both domains to social in-
teraction. Little is known, for example, about whether
children who have a strong grasp of mental states also
are  advanced  in  their  understanding  of  emotions.
Nor is it known how, or indeed if, these domains in-
ﬂuence each other in their development. Does seeing
another child show an emotional response to a situa-
tion that differs from his or her own response help a
child  understand  that  people  may  have  different
points of view, for example?

Evidence  that  does  exist  concerning  the  relation
between understanding of false-belief and emotion is
mixed. Dunn et al. (1991) found that family measures
at  33  months  were  more  strongly  associated  with
emotion understanding at 40 months than with false-
belief  understanding,  leading  the  authors  to  specu-
late that understanding emotion and understanding
belief  may  develop  along  different  lines,  with  emo-
tion  understanding  perhaps  being  more  inﬂuenced
by patterns of family interaction than is understand-
ing of belief. In addition, Dunn et al. noted that per-
formance on their emotion understanding and false-
belief  tasks  did  not  correlate  signiﬁcantly.  The  chil-
dren’s  understanding  of  false-belief  was  assessed
when they were very young (only 40 months), how-
ever, and was limited in scope, focusing only on the
ability  to  explain  a  character’s  action  in  terms  of  a
false-belief. Stronger evidence for a dissociation be-
tween  understanding  of  belief  and  emotion  comes
from the ﬁnding that individual differences in each
domain  at  40  months  had  distinct  sequelae  at  the
end  of  the  children’s  kindergarten  year  of  school
(Dunn, 1995).

In  contrast  to  these  ﬁndings,  there  is  some  evi-
dence for a link between understanding of false-belief
and  emotion.  Several  studies  have  shown  that,  by
around 4 years of age, children can appreciate that the
emotion a person feels about a given event depends
upon that person’s perception of the event and their
beliefs and desires about it. For example, if an event
differs from the person’s belief about what will hap-
pen, they are likely to feel surprise; they will be happy
if they (falsely) believe that they will get what they
want  (Baron-Cohen,  1991;  Hadwin  &  Perner,  1991;
Harris,  Johnson,  Hutton,  Andrews,  &  Cooke,  1989;

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Wellman & Banerjee, 1991). These studies, however,
have  focused  primarily  on  group  means  and  age
norms,  rather  than  investigating  individual  differ-
ences. One study has looked at individual differences
in understanding of false-belief and emotion. Hughes
and Dunn (1998) conducted a longitudinal study of
50 children aged 47 months to 60 months, examining
developmental  changes  in  understanding  of  false-
belief  and  emotion,  and  mental-state  conversation
with friends. They found that individual differences
in  understanding  of  both  false-belief  and  emotion
were  stable  over  this  time  period  and  were  signiﬁ-
cantly related to each other. In addition, these differ-
ences were reﬂected in children’s use of mental-state
terms in everyday conversations with their friends.

Family Background and Social Cognition

The majority of published studies of theory of mind
development have investigated the abilities of middle-
and  upper-middle-class  children  from  generally
well-educated families. It may not be appropriate to
generalize results from these groups to all children,
however, particularly those from impoverished back-
grounds. Signiﬁcant differences between middle-class
and  working-class  children  have  been  identiﬁed  in
other areas of cognition, such as conservation (Roazzi
& Bryant, 1997) and verbal development (Hart & Ris-
ley, 1995). Given the apparent importance of aspects
of the family environment such as sibling interactions
and family discourse about inner states, it may be ex-
pected  that  socioeconomic  status  (SES)  also  has  an
impact on social cognition. The role of family back-
ground in the development of children’s understand-
ing of belief and emotion, however, has not been sys-
tematically investigated.

There  is  some  evidence  that  family  background
plays a role in theory of mind development. Children
from a Head Start population have been reported to
perform poorly on false-belief tests, although in this
case, performance was compared only to levels “typ-
ically  reported  in  the  literature”  (Holmes,  Black,  &
Miller,  1996).  Cross-cultural  studies  also  have  sug-
gested that family background affects theory of mind
development; for example, afﬂuent Indian children
outperformed  their  deprived  counterparts  in  mak-
ing mental-real distinctions (Wahi & Johri, 1994). In
addition, parenting style (authoritarian versus au-
thoritative) may relate to young children’s theory
of mind performance (Vinden, 1997), and parenting
style is known to vary considerably across different
family backgrounds (for a review, see Hoff-Ginsberg
& Tardif, 1995).

Work  on  emotion  understanding  has  included

Cutting and Dunn

855

studies  of  low-income  families  (e.g.,  Garner,  Jones,
Gaddy, & Rennie, 1997) and cross-cultural compari-
sons  (see  Saarni  &  Harris,  1991),  which,  taken  to-
gether, hint at poorer emotion understanding in chil-
dren  from  deprived  backgrounds.  Young  children’s
emotion understanding also has been found to corre-
late signiﬁcantly with their fathers’ occupational pres-
tige (Dunn et al., 1991), level of education, and occu-
pational class (Dunn & Brown, 1994).

In this study, we examine social cognition in a large
sample of urban preschoolers from a wide range of
backgrounds.  The  goals  of  the  study  are  threefold.
The ﬁrst goal is to examine individual differences in
children’s understanding of false-belief and emotion
using a comprehensive multimeasure approach to as-
sessment. This is likely to give an accurate assessment
of a child’s ability, and is more sensitive to individual
differences  than  are  single-test  approaches,  which
simply categorize children as “passers” or “failers.”
The second goal of the study is to investigate links be-
tween individual differences in social cognition and
individual  differences  in  family  background.  The
third goal is to examine how different aspects of so-
cial cognition relate to one another, focusing on un-
derstanding  of  false-belief,  emotion  understanding,
and language ability.

METHOD
Participants

mean

⫽

 
range

  age  of  4.16  years  (

The  participants  were  128  children  (63  girls,  65
boys)  with  a 
  3.49–
4.80). The children attended nursery schools in South
London and were taking part in a longitudinal study
of  friendship  in  young  children.  The  children  came
about  equally  from  working-class  and  middle-class
backgrounds (see below for details). Sixty-eight per-
cent were White, 26% were Black or mixed race, and
6% were from other ethnic groups.

Procedure

Each child was seen twice in nursery school (visits
conducted,  on  average,  1  week  apart)  and  once  at
home (on average, 3 weeks later). A battery of false-
belief,  language,  and  emotion  understanding  tests
was administered over the course of these visits. Fam-
ily background information was collected from par-
ents. The majority of children participated in all the
tests involved in the study. Some did not complete
every task, for a variety of reasons (e.g., noncompli-
ance, absence from school), so speciﬁc 
s are given
for each task with the results.

N

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

856 Child Development

False-Belief Tasks

1. Unexpected-location tasks.

A  total  of  eight  false-belief  tasks  were  adminis-
tered, all of which involved predicting, explaining, or
recalling a false-belief. Three types of task were used.
Four  unexpected-location
stories were used, based on the tasks used by Bartsch
and Wellman (1989): Two tasks required the explana-
tion of a character’s action in terms of a false-belief,
and two tasks required the prediction of a character’s
action based on a false-belief. These stories were pre-
sented interleaved with other tasks in the testing ses-
sion. For each story, children were presented with a
prototypical  box  and  a  matching  plain  box,  and
shown that the prototypical box was empty, whereas
the plain box contained the item in question. A ﬁller
story,  in  which  the  prototypical  box  contained  the
item and the plain box was empty, also was included
to prevent children from guessing that the plain box
(rather than the prototypical box) would always be
full. A puppet (matching the child for sex and race)
was  then  introduced  who  “had  not  seen  the  two
boxes before.”

In the explanation stories, the puppet expressed a
desire  for  the  item,  and  walked  to  the  prototypical
box. Children were asked “Why is [puppet] looking
in there?” If no belief-based answer was forthcoming,
the prompt “What does [puppet] think?” was given.
Children  scored  2  points  if  they  spontaneously  re-
ferred to a mistaken belief in explaining the puppet’s
action and passed the reality control question (“Are
there [e.g., crayons] in there really?”), 1 point if they
referred  to  a  mistaken  belief  after  prompting  and
passed  the  reality  control  question,  and  0  points  if
they made no clear reference to a mistaken belief.

In  the  prediction  stories,  the  puppet  expressed  a
desire  for  the  item,  and  then  walked  to  a  position
equidistant  between  the  two  boxes.  Children  were
asked to predict where the puppet would look. This
question  was  presented  in  a  forced-choice  format;
children were coded as successful if they responded
correctly  to  both  the  test  question  and  the  reality
control  question  (“Will  [puppet]  ﬁnd  the  [e.g.,  ce-
real] in there?”).

2. Unexpected-identity task.

Children  were  told  a
story  from  a  peep-through  pop-up  book  that  in-
volved an element with a deceptive identity, follow-
ing the procedure used by Hughes, Dunn, and White
(1998). On each of the ﬁrst ﬁve pages, the child saw an
eye peeping through a hole in the page. On the sixth
page, children were asked to name what they could
see (an eye) before turning over the ﬁnal page, which
revealed  that  the  “eye”  was  actually  a  spot  on  a
snake’s  tail.  Turning  back  to  the  penultimate  page,

two  test  questions  were  asked.  First,  children  were
asked what they had thought the picture was before
the page was turned. Second, a naive puppet was in-
troduced, and children were asked to predict whether
the puppet would think that the picture was of an eye
or a snake. Children were credited with success on
the “recall-own-false-belief” and “predict-other’s-false-
belief” questions only if they also passed the reality
control questions (“What is it really?”).

3. Current false-belief tasks.

Children heard two sto-
ries  based  on  the  story  developed  by  Harris  et  al.
(1989). These are designed to examine children’s un-
derstanding of a character’s false-belief and also how
the character will feel as a result of that false-belief.
For the purposes of this analysis, however, only the
false-belief  aspect  of  the  stories  was  used.  The  two
stories used in the present study involved a character
surprising  a  friend,  and  placed  the  false-belief  sce-
nario in a realistic context that children would be ex-
pected to be familiar with. One story involved a mean
trick, in which a character exchanged his friend’s fa-
vorite drink for a disliked drink while the friend was
away. The second story involved a nice surprise, in
which a character exchanged a friend’s disliked food
for liked food, again in the friend’s absence. Children
were credited with success on each task if they cor-
rectly stated what the friend thought he was getting
to drink/eat, and what he was really getting.

Emotion Understanding

Children’s  understanding  of  emotion  was  tested
using  the  procedure  developed  by  Denham  (1986),
which  involves both  affective labeling and affective
perspective-taking.  Children  were  shown  four  felt
faces portraying happy, sad, angry, and frightened ex-
pressions. They were asked to identify these expres-
sions, ﬁrst expressively, by naming, and then recep-
tively, by pointing to the expression the experimenter
named. Two points were awarded for correct naming/
pointing, and 1 point for identifying the wrong spe-
ciﬁc emotion but the correct valence (e.g., calling the
frightened  face  “sad”  or  “bad”),  and  0  points  for  a
wrong-valence  emotion  (e.g.,  picking  “happy”  in-
stead  of  “angry”).  Children’s  scores  for  expressive
and receptive labeling were then summed to give an
aggregate  score  (maximum  score 
  16,  from  eight
identiﬁcations).

⫽

To  examine  affective  perspective-taking  ability
(children’s understanding of the links between partic-
ular  situations  and  emotions),  children  were  intro-
duced to a puppet (matching the child for gender and
race) with no face. The puppet enacted 16 vignettes
portraying  situations  in  which  the  protagonist  felt

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Cutting and Dunn

857

happiness, sadness, anger, or fear, such as going to the
zoo, seeing a parent off on a trip, having a toy hidden
by a sibling, or having a bad dream. Each of the sto-
ries was acted out with full vocal and facial cues for
the  puppet’s  feelings.  In  eight  of  the  vignettes,  the
puppet’s  emotion  was  what  most  people  would  be
expected to feel in the situation. In the other eight, the
puppet’s  emotion  differed  from  the  emotion  previ-
ously  predicted  by  the  mother  for  the  child. At  the
end of each story children were asked how the pup-
pet felt. Children could respond verbally, or nonver-
bally, by selecting one of four felt faces (children were
credited with their best answers if they gave both a
verbal  and  a  nonverbal  answer  and  these  were
contradictory—a  rare  occurrence).  Responses  were
scored  as  in  the  affective  labeling  task  (maximum
score 

 32).

⫽

Language Measures

Children’s verbal skills were assessed using mea-
sures of both receptive vocabulary (long form of the
BPVS;  Dunn,  Dunn,  Whetton,  &  Pintilie,  1982)  and
narrative expressive language ability (the Bus Story;
Renfrew, 1991). The Bus Story involves the child re-
telling  a  simple  story  about  a  bus,  from  a  picture
book,  which  is  transcribed  verbatim  and  scored  for
content/coherence, sentence length, and basic gram-
matical complexity.

Family Background

Family  background  data  were  collected  concern-
ing family structure (single or two-parent family), the
number  of  adults  in  the  home,  the  number  of  lan-
guages spoken in the home, the number of other chil-
dren in the home, and parental education and occu-
pation. Other children living in the home were almost
all  siblings  (full,  half,  or  step  siblings),  but  in  three
cases included cousins or foster children living per-
manently with the family. For simplicity, other chil-
dren  in  the  home  will  be  referred  to  as  siblings.
Twenty-eight of the families in the study (22%) were
single-parent families (mothers only). Twenty-two of
the families had only one adult living in the home, 13
had three or four adults in the home, and the remain-
der had two adults at home. Ten families spoke two
or more languages at home, but all children were ﬂu-
ent in English. Twenty-six of the children in the study
were  only  children  or  had  no  siblings  living  in  the
home.  Sixty-ﬁve  children  had  one  sibling  living  at
home, 27 had two, 7 had three, 2 had four, and 1 child
had seven siblings at home.

Parental educational level was classiﬁed according

⫽

⫽

⫽

⫽

 degree or higher, 3 

to the following scheme: 4 
 up
to A level (equivalent to high school graduation in the
 up to GCSE/O level (national ex-
United States), 2 
aminations  taken  at  15/16  years),  1 
  no  qualiﬁca-
tions.  Occupational  class  was  classiﬁed  using  the
Standard Occupational Classiﬁcation (Ofﬁce of Popu-
⫽
lation  Censuses  and  Surveys,  1991),  as  follows:  I 
  managerial
professional  (e.g.,  doctor,  solicitor),  II 
⫽
and technical (e.g., teacher, computer analyst), IIIN 
skilled,  nonmanual  (e.g.,  secretary,  ﬁnancial  clerk),
 skilled, manual (e.g., hairdresser, carpenter),
IIIM 
⫽
⫽
IV 
unskilled (e.g., cleaner, laborer). In cases where a par-
ent was not currently working, most recent occupa-
tion was categorized. Table 1 summarizes the educa-
tional  and  occupational  class  description  of  the
sample. “Missing” data include data that could not be
collected and absent parents (fathers only).

⫽
 semiskilled (e.g., gardener, security guard), V 

⫽

The distribution of occupational classes shown in
Table 1 is slightly higher than is reported for the Brit-
ish  population  (1981  census),  but  this  is  largely  be-
cause parents who were not currently working were
classiﬁed  according  to  their  most  recent  occupation
(these parents would not be included in the occupa-
tional census). In fact, 18% of fathers for whom there
were data were unemployed. Many mothers were not
working  either  (34%),  but  this  was  generally  by
choice.  Of  the  mothers  who  were  working,  51%
worked part-time. Twenty-one percent of families did
not have a parent in full-time work. Classifying fami-
lies more broadly, according to father’s occupational
class (mother’s in single-parent families), the sample
overall was about equally divided between working-
class  families  (48%;  working-class 
  occupational
classes III–V) and middle-class families (52%; middle-
class 
 occupational classes I, II). Although it is true

⫽

⫽

Table 1 Summary of Educational Level and Occupational Class
(Percentage of Sample in Each Category)

Mother

Father

Educational level

Degree or higher
Up to A level
Up to GCSE/O level
No qualifications
Missing data

Occupational class
Professional (I)
Managerial/technical (II)
Skilled, nonmanual (IIIN)
Skilled, manual (IIIM)
Semiskilled (IV)
Unskilled (V)
Missing data

29.7
20.3
28.9
15.6
5.5

10.2
32.0
32.8
6.3
12.5
1.6
4.7

32.8
14.8
14.1
13.3
25.0

18.8
33.6
7.0
16.4
4.7
4.7
14.8

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

858 Child Development

Table 2

Intertask Correlations for False-Belief Tasks

N

% Pass

1

2

3

4

.82**

.31**
.40**

.27**
.38**

.46**

Explain action
1. “Crayons”
2. “Plasters”
Predict action

3. “Lego”
4. “Cereal”

Unexpected identity

5. Other’s false-belief
6. Recall own false-belief

State other’s belief

7. Mean trick
8. Nice surprise

*

p

 

⬍

 .05; **

p

 

⬍

 .01.

116
114

117
117

123
123

112
124

56
57

42
36

39
55

50
45

5

.07
.12

.25**
.21*

6

.05
.11

.16
.01

⫺

.18*

7

8

.43**
.52**

.27**
.31**

.25**
.24**

.28**
.37**

.38**
.35**

.29**
.28**

.47**

that social class does not necessarily correlate with in-
come level, in British samples like this, occupational
class “has proved robust as a marker variable for so-
cioeconomic position” (Ofﬁce of Population Censuses
and Surveys, 1991, Vol. 3, p. 11).

Sibling Relationship Interview

⫽

For  those  children  with  at  least  one  sibling  be-
tween 2 and 12 years of age (
 92), we interviewed
 
n
mothers  about  the  quality  of  the  target  child’s  rela-
tionship with their nearest sibling, using an interview
developed in the Colorado Adoption Project (Stocker,
Dunn,  &  Plomin,  1989).  This  interview  asks  about
both positive and negative aspects of the sibling rela-
tionship  and  produces  two  factors  (positivity  and
negativity) for both the target child and the sibling.
The positivity factor includes items such as affection
and  playing  together;  the  negativity  factor  includes
items such as quarrelling and jealousy.

p

 

⬍

question,  but  were  treated  as  missing  for  that  task.
The intertask correlations for the false-belief tasks are
shown in Table 2. Virtually every task correlated sig-
niﬁcantly, 
 .01, with every other task, with the
notable  exception  of  “recall-own-false-belief”  in
the  unexpected-identity  task. An  irregularity  in  the
presentation of this section of the task was later iden-
tiﬁed, which seems to account for the lack of corre-
lation  between  the  “recall-own-false-belief”  task
and the other false-belief tasks. This task was there-
␣
fore excluded from further analysis. Cronbach’s 
 for
the remaining seven false-belief tasks was .80. Each
child was given an aggregate false-belief score, cal-
culated as the number of points scored divided by
the  maximum  number  of  points  that  could  have
been  scored  (excluding  missing  tasks  and  tasks  in
which the child failed the control). A wide range of
individual differences was apparent; the mean ag-
gregate false-belief score was .42, with a standard de-
viation of .32.

RESULTS
The  results  are  presented  in  two  sections.  First,  de-
scriptive  results  for  the  various  measures  used  are
presented. Second, the relations between these mea-
sures are explored.

Emotion Understanding

Children’s understanding of emotion was assessed
using  Denham’s  (1986)  affective  labeling  and  affec-
tive perspective-taking tasks. One hundred and four
children  completed  the  affective  labeling  task.  The

False-Belief Tasks

Children  scored  1  point  for  each  false-belief  task
passed, except for the two explanation tasks, in which
two points were given for a spontaneous correct ex-
planation, and 1 point for a prompted correct expla-
nation. Children who failed control questions (which
was very rare) were not counted as failing the task in

Table 3 Language Scores

Task

BPVS
Information
Sentence length
Complexity

N

127
122
122
122

Mean

SD

Age Norm

97.4
17.4
8.3
1.0

12.4
8.4
2.4
1.2

100
16
8
1

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

Cutting and Dunn

859

Table  4 Partial  Correlations  between  False-Belief,  Emotion
Understanding, and Language Scores (Age Partialed Out)

Aff-PT
Aff-lab
BPVS
Information
Sentence length
Complexity

FB

.44**
.39**
.33**
.50**
.36**
.35**

Aff-PT

Aff-lab

–

.58**
.45**
.47**
.37**
.24**

–
–

.38**
.39**
.19*
.17

of  the  child’s  story),  (2)  sentence  length  (the  mean
length of the child’s longest ﬁve sentences), and (3)
complexity (a measure of the grammatical complexity
of  the  child’s  sentences  in  terms  of  subordinate
clauses). The information score is the primary index
of narrative expressive language ability. All four lan-
guage scores correlated signiﬁcantly with each other,
all 
p

 .01.

⬍

s 

⫽

 affective perspective-

Correlations between False-Belief Understanding, 
Emotion Understanding, and Language

Children’s false-belief understanding, emotion un-
derstanding,  and  language  abilities  were  clearly  re-
lated to one another; all three domains were highly
correlated. Age also correlated with each domain, but
all  correlations  remained  signiﬁcant  after  age  was
partialed out (see Table 4). Language was highly cor-
related  with  both  false-belief  and  emotion  under-
standing, but even with all four language measures
and age partialed out, the correlation between false-
belief understanding and affective perspective-taking
was signiﬁcant, 
 
r

 .22, 

 .02.

⫽

⬍

p

 

Correlations between Family Background 
and Social Cognition

Table 5 shows the correlations between the family
background variables and children’s false-belief, emo-
tion understanding, and language scores (only BPVS
and Bus Story information scores are included here,
as these are the primary indexes of language ability).
Note that occupational class is reverse coded so that
class I (professional) scores highest, and class V (un-
skilled) scores lowest. Maternal education and occu-

⫽

FB 

Note:
taking, Aff-lab 
⬍
*
p

 .05; **

⬍

p

 

 

⫽
 .01.

 false-belief aggregate, Aff-PT 

 affective labeling.

⫽

 

 

␣

⫽

⫽

⫽

 
SD

 
SD

 4.3, 

  3 – 16);  Cronbach’s 

  2.2,
mean  affective  labeling  score  was  14.1  (
  .71.  The  affective
range
perspective-taking  task  was  completed  by  115  chil-
dren.  The  mean  affective  perspective-taking  score
⫽
was 27.0 (
0.73.  Denham  combined  the  affective  labeling  and
affective perspective-taking scores to give an overall
affective aggregate score. Cronbach’s 
 for the over-
all score in this study was .81, but as only 96 of the
children received both tasks, it was decided to keep
the two scores separate to avoid loss of data.

 10–32); Cronbach’s 

 
range

␣
 

⫽

␣

Language Measures

Children’s mean scores on the two language mea-
sures (BPVS long form, and the Bus Story) are shown
in Table 3, along with the standardized norms for chil-
dren of this age. The BPVS score is a measure of recep-
tive vocabulary. The Bus Story provides three scores
reﬂecting  narrative  expressive  language  ability:  (1)
information (a measure of the content and coherence

Table  5 Correlations  between  Family  Background  Variables,  False-Belief,  Emotion
Understanding, and Language

FB

Aff-PT

Aff-lab

BPVS

Information

Mother variables

Education
Occupational class

Father variables

Education
Occupational class

Other family variables

Family structure
Languages spoken
Adults at home
Siblings at home

.31**
.37**

.15
.26**

.11
.06
.11
.02

⫺

⫺

.41**
.30**

.20
.30**

⫺

.22**
.12
.12
.07

.38**
.26**

.31**
.34**

⫺

.09
.07
.08
.13

.40**
.23**

.38**
.45**

.22**
.08
.04
.26**

⫺

⫺

.29**
.21*

.23*
.29**

.19*
.21**
.10
.12

⫺

⫺

 false-belief aggregate, Aff-PT 

⫽

 affective perspective-taking, Aff-lab 

⫽

 affec-

⫽

FB 

Note:
tive labeling.
*
 
p
p

 .05; **

⬍

 

⬍

 .01.

860 Child Development

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

pational class were highly correlated with children’s
false-belief,  emotion  understanding,  and  language
abilities. The same was true for paternal occupational
class, but not for paternal education (this may simply
reﬂect the fact that education data were missing for a
quarter of the children’s fathers).

⫽

⫽

or

 occupational class assigned to the mother 

The  relation  between  parental  occupational  class
and  children’s  social  cognition  was  especially  clear
when  group  means  were  examined.  Children  from
middle-class  families  did  signiﬁcantly  better  than
children  from  working-class  families  in  all  the  do-
mains that we assessed. This is shown in Table 6. In
this table, families are classiﬁed according to the 
high-
 father
est
(middle-class 
  occupational  classes  I,  II;  working-
class 
 occupational classes III–V). This is thus the
most generous classiﬁcation; if families are classed ac-
cording to mother’s or father’s occupational class sep-
arately or are given an average occupational class, the
difference  between  working-class  and  middle-class
children is even more pronounced. All the differences
shown in Table 6 between middle-class and working-
⬍
class children are signiﬁcant at 
 .01 (
 tests). This is
 
t
p
not simply a function of age (the two groups of chil-
dren do not differ in age distribution) or language—
the  differences  between  middle-class  and  working-
class children for false-belief understanding and affec-
tive  perspective-taking  remain  signiﬁcant, 
  .05,
even when language is covaried out.

⬍

p

 

Having  a  single  parent  was  not  related  to  chil-
dren’s  false-belief  ability,  but  children  with  single
parents did perform signiﬁcantly worse on the affec-
tive perspective-taking and language measures. Bilin-
gual  children  performed  as  well  as  children  who
spoke  only  English  on  all  the  tasks  except  the  Bus
Story, but only 10 children in the sample were bilin-
gual, so this ﬁnding should be viewed with caution.
The number of adults living in the home was unrelated
to children’s social cognition and language skills.

The number of siblings children had did not corre-
late with their false-belief or emotion understanding
scores either, a ﬁnding that is at odds with some pre-
vious  research  ﬁndings.  We  examined  the  effect  of
younger and older siblings separately, but still found

no  signiﬁcant  correlations  with  false-belief  or  emo-
tion understanding. For those children with at least
one sibling between 2 and 12 years of age, we also ex-
amined whether the mother’s report of the quality of
the child’s relationship with their nearest sibling was
associated with the child’s social cognition. The inter-
view  used  yielded  positivity  and  negativity  factors
for both the target child and the sibling. None of these
factors  correlated  signiﬁcantly  with  the  children’s
false-belief and emotion understanding scores, how-
ever, although correlations between positivity in the
sibling relationship and children’s false-belief scores
did increase for children with more siblings.

Multivariate Analyses

In order to explore further the links between false-
belief  understanding,  emotion  understanding,  lan-
guage, and family background, we conducted a series
of  linear  hierarchical  multiple  regressions.  Initially,
on  the  basis  of  the  correlational  results,  we  entered
age, family background (maternal education and oc-
cupational  class,  and  paternal  occupational  class),
language  (BPVS  and  Bus  Story  information),  and
emotion understanding (affective labeling and affec-
tive perspective-taking) into a multiple regression as
one  step,  with  false-belief  score  as  the  dependent
variable. This established that variance in age, family
background,  language  ability,  and  emotion  under-
standing together accounted for 48.8% of the variance
⫽
in children’s false-belief scores, 
8.33, 
 .001. A second regression was conducted for
p
affective perspective-taking, including false-belief score
as  an  independent  variable  and  excluding  affective
labeling. Affective perspective-taking was used as the
dependent variable rather than affective labeling,  be-
cause it is the more stringent measure of emotion un-
derstanding. Variance in age, family background, lan-
guage ability, and false-belief understanding together
accounted for 34.5% of the variance in children’s af-
⫽
fective perspective-taking scores, 
 .001. In further regressions, each variable
6.70, 
(or group of variables) was systematically separated
out in a second step to determine the unique variance

 .345, 
(7, 96) 
F

(8, 78) 
F

 .488, 

⬍
 

⫽
 

2
R

2
R

⫽

⬍

p

 

 

Table 6 Mean Scores of Middle-Class and Working-Class Children

Class

⫽

Middle (
n
Working (n ⫽ 48)a

 76)

 

a

FB

.50
.31

Aff-PT

Aff-lab

BPVS

Information

28.1
25.3

14.6
13.4

101
91

19
15

Note: FB ⫽ false-belief aggregate, Aff-PT ⫽ affective perspective-taking, Aff-lab ⫽ affec-
tive labeling.
a ns using most generous classiﬁcation scheme (class data missing for four families).

Table 7 Summary of Regression Analyses

False-Belief

Affective 

Perspective-Taking

Cutting and Dunn

861

Independent Variables

⌬R2

F

⌬R2

Age
Family background
Language
Emotion understanding
False belief

* p ⬍ .05; ** p ⬍ 0.01.

.041
.123
.120
.002
–
Total R2 ⫽ .488

5.62*
5.59**
8.18**
.17
–

F(8, 78) ⫽ 8.33, p ⬍ .01

F

3.89*
1.87
4.87**

–
1.91

.029
.041
.072
–
.014

Total R2 ⫽ .345

F(7, 96) ⫽ 6.70, p ⬍ .01

that  it  contributed  to  false-belief  understanding
and to emotion understanding (affective perspective-
taking).

Table 7 summarizes the results of both sets of re-
gressions.  Variance  in  language  ability  contributed
the  most  unique  variance  to  both  false-belief  and
emotion  understanding.  Age  also  was  a  signiﬁcant
contributor  to  both  areas.  Variance  in  family  back-
ground  contributed  uniquely  to  false-belief  ability,
but its contribution to emotion understanding was al-
most all overlapping with variance in the other fac-
tors examined. False-belief and emotion understand-
ing did not contribute to each other independently of
the other factors included in the regressions.

Gender Differences

There  were  some  gender  differences  in  our  re-
sults: girls performed somewhat better than boys on
the  false-belief  tasks  (M  [girls]  ⫽  .48,  SD  ⫽  .34;  M
[boys] ⫽ .36, SD ⫽ .30), and the difference was sig-
niﬁcant, t(125) ⫽ 2.22, p ⬍ .05. Girls also performed
slightly  better  than  boys  on  both  emotion  under-
standing tasks, but neither difference was signiﬁcant.
There  were  no  signiﬁcant  differences  between  girls
and  boys  in  any  language  score,  in  age,  or  for  any
family background variable.

The  intertask  correlations  for  girls  and  boys  also
were very similar, with one interesting exception: the
relation  between  language  and  false-belief  under-
standing. For boys, all four language measures corre-
lated highly with false-belief scores (r ⬎ .40, p ⬍ .01 in
each case). For girls, however, the picture was differ-
ent. The Bus Story information and complexity scores
correlated signiﬁcantly with false-belief scores (infor-
mation, r ⫽ .44, p ⬍ .01; complexity, r ⫽ .29, p ⬍ .05),
but  neither  the  BPVS  nor  the  Bus  Story  sentence
length  scores  did.  In  fact,  the  correlations  between
false-belief and BPVS scores differed signiﬁcantly be-

tween boys and girls (boys ⬎ girls; z ⫽ 2.04, p ⬍ .05).
Girls’ BPVS scores did show more variance than did
boys’, but even when two groups with equal variance
in BPVS scores were selected, false-belief understand-
ing did not correlate signiﬁcantly with the BPVS for
girls, but did so for boys, and these correlations still
differed signiﬁcantly. This suggests that for boys, all
aspects  of  language  may  be  related  to  social  cogni-
tion. For girls, however, it may be that narrative ex-
pressive abilities are particularly important.

DISCUSSION
One of the most important aspects of this study is the
nature of the sample itself. The majority of investiga-
tions into young children’s social cognition have as-
sessed children from middle-class families, with rela-
tively  wealthy  and  well-educated  backgrounds.  In
this  study,  the  children  came  from  a  wide  range  of
backgrounds (see Table 1). A large proportion of the
families  came  from  extremely  deprived  areas  of
South London, lived in poor housing, and had low in-
comes.  In  addition  to  the  broad  spectrum  of  family
backgrounds,  this  study  assessed  a  relatively  large
number  of  children  (128)  and  made  comprehensive
assessments of social cognition, using a multimeasure
approach designed to give an accurate picture of each
child’s ability.

The results of the study were compelling. First, we
found that family background has signiﬁcant impli-
cations for young children’s social cognition. Second,
our results support previous research demonstrating
an important role for language in theory of mind de-
velopment (Happé, 1995; Jenkins & Astington, 1996).
Third, the ﬁndings in some respects support the sug-
gestion that social cognition is not a unitary concept,
and that, in particular, understanding of false-belief
and understanding of emotion should be viewed as
related but distinct aspects of social cognition ( Dunn,

862 Child Development

1995; Dunn et al., 1991). We will discuss each of these
points in turn.

Family Background and Social Cognition

The results of this study show that children’s fam-
ily background makes a strong contribution to the de-
velopment of their social cognition, in particular, to
their understanding of false-belief. This is in addition
to, and independent of, the contributions of language
and  age.  We  used  very  general  measures  of  family
background, however, and the task now is to identify
exactly  how  family  background  affects  young  chil-
dren’s understanding of themselves and other people.
What are the mechanisms by which individual differ-
ences in factors as basic as parental education and oc-
cupational class affect young children’s understand-
ing  of  thoughts  and  feelings?  Is  it  via  the  ways  in
which parents talk to their children and interact with
them? Or via the activities they take part in, or facili-
ties they are able to provide for their children? Do dif-
ferent  styles  of  parenting  (e.g.,  authoritarian  versus
authoritative) inﬂuence young children’s social cog-
nition?  Many  of  these  factors  are  known  to  vary
across different family backgrounds (for a review see
Hoff-Ginsberg  &  Tardif,  1995),  but  their  potential
links to children’s social cognition remain largely un-
explored (but see Vinden, 1997, for an exception). Of
course, none of these possibilities is mutually exclu-
sive, and genetic as well as environmental links may
underpin  relations  between  parent  and  child  vari-
ables (Scarr, 1992).

We found no correlation between children’s false-
belief  understanding  and  the  number  of  siblings
(older, younger, or both) that they had. This may in
part reﬂect the diverse nature of the sample involved
in this study—it is possible that siblings from differ-
ent family backgrounds interact in qualitatively dif-
ferent ways (Dunn, Slomkowski, & Beardsall, 1994),
which may affect theory of mind development. It also
should be noted that this lack of correlation between
children’s false-belief understanding and number of
siblings does not imply that siblings do not inﬂuence
young  children’s  social  cognition;  indeed,  there  is
plenty  of  evidence  to  the  contrary  (e.g.,  Azmitia  &
Hesser, 1993; Brown & Dunn, 1992). We suggest that it
is the quality or type of sibling interactions and rela-
tionships that are likely to be important for theory of
mind  development—not  simply  the  number  of  sib-
lings that a child has. As a ﬁrst step toward investigat-
ing this possibility, we interviewed mothers about the
quality  of  the  target  child’s  relationship  with  their
nearest sibling, but this did not correlate with the chil-
dren’s  false-belief  scores.  We  asked  only  about  one

sibling  relationship,  however;  in  larger  families  all
the sibling relationships may be important. It also is
possible that it is more speciﬁc aspects of sibling inter-
actions, rather than global factors, that matter most in
the development of social cognition.

Language and Social Cognition

Several recent studies have highlighted the impor-
tance  of  children’s  language  abilities  in  theory  of
mind development (e.g., Happé 1995; Jenkins & As-
tington, 1996). Our results strongly support this ﬁnd-
ing,  because  language  made  a  signiﬁcant  contribu-
tion to false-belief understanding, independent of age
and family background. Our results also extend this
ﬁnding to emotion understanding.

As  Jenkins  and  Astington  (1996)  point  out,  we
need  to  know  which  aspects  of  language  are  most
strongly related to the development of social cogni-
tion.  This  study  provides  some  pointers.  Receptive
vocabulary (BPVS) and several aspects of expressive
language (Bus Story) all related to the social cognition
measures. As such, it may be misleading to look for
one speciﬁc aspect of language that affects social cog-
nition more than any other. One potentially interest-
ing ﬁnding was the difference between girls and boys
with regard to language and false-belief understand-
ing. Although all aspects of language related to boys’
false-belief  understanding,  narrative  ability  seemed
to be particularly important for girls. This ﬁnding re-
quires replication before it is interpreted further, but
we speculate that the involvement of language in the
development of social cognition may differ for girls
and boys.

False-Belief and Emotion Understanding

Children’s  false-belief  performance  was  highly
correlated with their understanding of the emotional
consequences of events in this study. Correlation does
not imply cause, however, and the regression analy-
ses indicated that these two domains of social cogni-
tion may in fact be somewhat distinct in children of
this age. Language proved to be a strong contributor
to both domains, as did age. Family background was
clearly related to both false-belief and emotion un-
derstanding, but only contributed uniquely to false-
belief  understanding.  More  important,  variance  in
false-belief understanding did not contribute inde-
pendently to variance in emotion understanding or
vice versa.

There are several ways in which these ﬁndings can
be interpreted. False-belief understanding and emo-
tion  understanding  may  follow  different  develop-

mental courses; family background, as we measured
it,  may  be  important  for  some  aspects  of  children’s
emotion  understanding,  but  at  an  earlier,  or  later,
phase  than  we  assessed. Alternatively,  family  back-
ground may be important for both domains of social
cognition, but its inﬂuence on emotion understand-
ing may be almost entirely overlapping with the in-
ﬂuence of other factors such as language. A third pos-
sibility is that children’s family background may be
important  for  both  false-belief  and  emotion  under-
standing, but in different ways; whereas factors such
as  parental  education  and  occupational  class  affect
children’s understanding of false-belief, more proxi-
mal processes, such as family interactions and dis-
course  about  feelings,  may  be  important  for  chil-
dren’s  understanding  of  the  causes  of  particular
emotional experiences (Brown & Dunn, 1996; Dunn
et al., 1991). Whichever interpretation is most accu-
rate,  our  results  add  weight  to  the  suggestion  that
false-belief and emotion understanding are distinct
aspects of social cognition, especially when taken in
conjunction  with  ﬁndings  suggesting  that  the  two
domains  have  differential  precursors  and  sequelae
(Dunn, 1995; Dunn et al., 1991).

In summary, the results reported in this article em-
phasize  the  importance  of  individual  differences
when  considering  the  development  of  young  chil-
dren’s social cognition. In particular, they raise the
issue of individual differences in family background
and the importance of considering these differences
when examining children’s theory of mind. A second
issue that arises from our results is the nature of the
relation that exists between children’s understanding
of  false-belief  and  their  understanding  of  emotion.
Our ﬁndings suggest that these domains are to some
extent distinct from each other, at least at the age of 4,
and that the correlation that exists between them is a
result of the inﬂuence of other factors such as age,
language, and family background. The picture is still
far from clear, however, and there is a need for fur-
ther  investigation  into  different  aspects  of  young
children’s social cognition; we suggest that longitu-
dinal studies of individual differences may be espe-
cially helpful. Finally, a word of caution. Generaliza-
tions about young children’s social cognition often
are  made  based  on  samples  of  children  with  rela-
tively  homogenous  backgrounds;  our  results  indi-
cate  that  clear  differences  exist  between  children
from  different  backgrounds,  and  we  would  there-
fore caution against such generalizations. It is com-
mon now to partial out both age and language abil-
ity  when  investigating  theory  of  mind  ability—at
the  very  least,  perhaps  a  measure  of  family  back-
ground should be included in this list.

Cutting and Dunn

863

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by a grant to Judy Dunn
from the National Institute of Child Health and Hu-
man Development (grant 5R01HD23158). We would
like to thank all the families and schools who partici-
pated in the study, and the researchers and staff in-
volved in the Friendship Project. We would also like
to  thank  Francesca  Happé  and  Claire  Hughes  for
helpful comments on an earlier draft of this article.

ADDRESSES AND AFFILIATIONS
Corresponding  author: Alexandra  L.  Cutting,  Insti-
tute  of  Psychiatry,  King’s  College  London,  Social,
Genetic,  and  Developmental  Psychiatry  Research
Centre, 111 Denmark Hill, London SE5 8AF, UK; e-mail:
a.cutting@iop.kcl. ac.uk. Judy Dunn is also at the In-
stitute of Psychiatry.

REFERENCES

Astington, J. W. (1993). The child’s discovery of the mind. Cam-

bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Azmitia, M., & Hesser, J. (1993). Why siblings are important
agents of cognitive development: A comparison of sib-
lings and peers. Child Development, 64, 430–444.

Baron-Cohen, S. (1988). Social and pragmatic deﬁcits in au-
tism: Cognitive or affective? Journal of Autism and Devel-
opmental Disorders, 18, 379–401.

Baron-Cohen,  S.  (1991).  Do  people  with  autism  under-
stand what causes emotion? Child Development, 62, 385–
395.

Bartsch, K., & Estes, D. (1996). Individual differences in chil-
dren’s developing theory of mind and implications for
metacognition.  Learning  and  Individual  Differences,  8(4),
281–304.

Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. (1989). Young children’s attribu-
tion of action to beliefs and desires. Child Development,
60, 946–964.

Brown, J. R., & Dunn, J. (1992). Talk with your mother or your
sibling? Developmental changes in early family conversa-
tions about feelings. Child Development, 63, 336–349.

Brown, J. R., & Dunn, J. (1996). Continuities in emotion under-
standing from 3 to 6 years. Child Development, 67, 789–802.
Cummings,  E.  M.,  Hollenbeck,  B.,  Ianotti,  R.,  Radke-
Yarrow,  M., & Zahn-Waxler, C. (1986). Early organiza-
tion of altruism and aggression: Developmental patterns
and individual differences. In C. Zahn-Waxler, E. M. Cum-
mings, & R. Ianotti (Eds.), Altruism and aggression (pp. 165–
188). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Denham, S. A. (1986). Social cognition, prosocial behavior,
and  emotion  in  preschoolers:  Contextual  validation.
Child Development, 57, 194–201.

de Villiers, J. G. (1995, April). Steps in the mastery of sentence
complements. Paper presented at the biennial meeting of

864 Child Development

the  Society  for  Research  in  Child  Development,  Indi-
anapolis, IN.

Dunn, J. (1995). Children as psychologists: The later corre-
lates of individual differences in understanding of emo-
tions and other minds. Cognition and Emotion, 9, 187–201.
Dunn, J., Bretherton, I., & Munn, P. (1987). Conversations
about  feeling  states  between  mothers  and  their  young
children. Developmental Psychology, 23(1), 132–139.

Dunn, J., & Brown. J. R. (1994). Affect expression in the fam-
ily, children’s understanding of emotions, and their in-
teractions with others. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 40(1), 120–
137.

Dunn, J., Brown, J., Slomkowski, C., Tesla, C., & Young-
blade  L.  (1991).  Young  children’s  understanding  of
other  people’s  feelings  and  beliefs:  Individual  differ-
ences and their antecedents. Child Development, 62, 1352–
1366.

Dunn, J., Slomkowski, C., & Beardsall, L. (1994). Sibling re-
lationships  from  the  preschool  period  through  middle
childhood and early adolescence. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 30, 315–324.

Dunn,  L.  M.,  Dunn,  L.  M.,  Whetton,  C.,  &  Pintilie,  D.
(1982).  British  Picture  Vocabulary  Scale.  Windsor,  UK:
NFER-Nelson.

Eisenmajer, R., & Prior, M. (1991). Cognitive linguistic cor-
relates  of  “theory  of  mind”  ability  in  autistic  children.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 9, 351–364.

Feldman,  C.  F.  (1988).  Early  forms  of  thought  about
thoughts: Some simple linguistic expressions of mental
state.  In  J.  W.  Astington,  P.  L.  Harris,  &  D.  R.  Olson
(Eds.),  Developing  theories  of  mind  (pp.  126–137).  New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Freeman,  N.  H.,  Lewis,  C.,  &  Doherty,  M.  J.  (1991).  Pre-
schoolers’ grasp of a desire for knowledge in false-belief
prediction: Practical intelligence and verbal report. Brit-
ish Journal of Developmental Psychology, 9, 139–157.

Garner,  P.  W.,  Jones,  D.  C.,  Gaddy,  G.,  &  Rennie,  K.  M.
(1997). Low-income mothers’ conversations about emo-
tions and their children’s emotional competence. Social
Development, 6, 37–52.

Hadwin, J., & Perner, J. (1991). Pleased and surprised: Chil-
dren’s cognitive theory of emotion. British Journal of De-
velopmental Psychology, 9, 215–234.

Happé, F. G. E. (1995). The role of age and verbal ability in
the theory of mind task performance of subjects with au-
tism. Child Development, 66, 843–855.

Harris, P. L. (1994). The child’s understanding of emotion:
Developmental  change  and  the  family  environment.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 35(1), 3–28.

Harris,  P.  L.,  Johnson,  C.,  Hutton,  D.,  Andrews,  G.,  &
Cooke, T. (1989). Young children’s theory of mind and
emotion. Cognition and Emotion, 3, 379–400.

Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in the ev-
eryday  experience  of  young  American  children.  Baltimore:
Brookes.

Hoff-Ginsberg, E., & Tardif, T. (1995). Socioeconomic status
and  parenting.  In  M.  H.  Bornstein  (Ed.),  Handbook  of
parenting: Vol. 2. Biology and ecology of parenting. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.

Holmes, H. A., Black, C., & Miller, S. A. (1996). A cross-task
comparison of false belief understanding in a Head-Start
population. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 63(2)
263–285.

Hresko, W. P., Reid, D. K., & Hammill, D. D. (1981). The Test of

Early Language Development (TELD). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Hughes,  C.,  &  Dunn,  J.  (1998).  Understanding  mind  and
emotion:  Longitudinal  associations  with  mental-state
talk between young friends. Developmental Psychology,
34(5), 1026–1037.

Hughes, C., Dunn, J., & White, A. (1988). Trick or Treat? Un-
even understanding of mind and emotion and executive
dysfunction  in  “hard-to-manage”  preschoolers.  Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 39, 981–994.

Jenkins, J. M., & Astington, J. W. (1996). Cognitive factors
and family structure associated with theory of mind de-
velopment in young children. Developmental Psychology,
32(1), 70–78.

Lewis,  C.,  Freeman,  N.  H.,  Hagestadt,  C.,  &  Douglas,  H.
(1994). Narrative access and production in preschoolers’
false belief reasoning. Cognitive Development, 9(4), 397–
424.

Lewis, C., Freeman, N. H., Kyriakidou, C., Maridaki-Kasso-
taki, K., & Berridge, D. M. (1996). Social inﬂuences on
false-belief access: Speciﬁc sibling inﬂuences or general
apprenticeship? Child Development, 67, 2930–2947.

Lewis, C., & Osborne, A. (1990). Three-year-olds’ problems
with false belief: Conceptual deﬁcit or linguistic artifact?
Child Development, 61, 1514–1519.

Mitchell, P. (1997). Acquiring a conception of mind: A review of
psychological  research  and  theory.  Hove,  UK:  Psychology
Press.

Moore, C., Pure, K., & Furrow, D. (1990). Children’s under-
standing  of  the  modal  expression  of  speaker  certainty
and uncertainty and its relation to the development of a
representational theory of mind. Child Development, 61,
722–730.

Moses, L. J., & Flavell, J. H. (1990). Inferring false beliefs from

actions and reactions. Child Development, 61, 929–945.

Murphy, L. B. (1937). Social behavior and child personality: A
exploratory  study  of  some  roots  of  sympathy.  New  York:
Columbia University Press.

Ofﬁce of Population Censuses and Surveys. (1991). Standard

Occupational Classiﬁcation. London: HMSO.

Olson, D. R. (1988). On the origins of belief and other inten-
tional states in children. In J. W. Astington, P. L. Harris, &
D. R. Olson (Eds.), Developing theories of mind (pp. 414–
426). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Perner, J., Ruffman, T., & Leekam, S. R. (1994). Theory of
mind is contagious: You catch it from your sibs. Child De-
velopment, 65, 1228–1238.

Renfrew, C. E. (1991). The Bus Story: A test of narrative speech.

Oxford, UK: Winslow Press.

Roazzi, A., & Bryant, P. (1997). Explicitness and Conserva-
tion: Social class differences. International Journal of Be-
havioral Development, 21(1), 52–70.

Saarni,  C.,  &  Harris,  P.  L.  (Eds.).  (1991).  Children’s  under-
standing of emotion. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Cutting and Dunn

865

Scarr, S. (1992). Developmental theories for the 1990s: De-
velopment  and  individual  differences.  Child  Develop-
ment, 63, 1–19.

Stocker, C., Dunn, J., & Plomin, R. (1989). Sibling relation-
ships: Links with child temperament, maternal behav-
ior,  and  family  structure.  Child  Development,  60,  715–
727.

Sullivan,  K.,  &  Winner,  E.  (1993).  Three-year-olds’  under-
standing of false mental states: The inﬂuence of trickery.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 56, 135–148.

Vinden,  P.  G.  (1997, April).  Parenting  and  theory  of  mind.
Paper presented at the biennial meeting of the Society
for Research in Child Development, Washington, DC.

Wahi, S., & Johri, R. (1994). Questioning a universal theory

of mind: Mental-real distinctions made by Indian chil-
dren. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 155, 503–510.

Welch-Ross, M. K. (1997). Mother-child participation in con-
versation about the past: Relationships to preschoolers’
theory of mind. Developmental Psychology, 33(4), 618–629.
Wellman, H. M., & Banerjee, M. (1991). Mind and emotion:
Children’s  understanding  of  the  emotional  conse-
quences of beliefs and desires. British Journal of Develop-
mental Psychology, 9, 191–214.

Youngblade,  L.  M.,  &  Dunn,  J.  (1995).  Individual  differ-
ences  in  young  children’s  pretend  play  with  mother
and sibling: Links to relationships and understanding
of  other  people’s  feelings  and  beliefs.  Child  Develop-
ment, 66, 1472–1492.

