Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 43:7 (2002), pp 849–860

The cost of understanding other people: social
cognition predicts young children’s sensitivity

to criticism

Alexandra L. Cutting1 and Judy Dunn2
1University of Reading, UK; 2Kings College London, UK

Background: Individual differences in sensitivity to teacher criticism, and their links with individual
differences in social cognition, were examined in 141 young children from diverse family backgrounds.
Methods: Children’s sensitivity to teacher criticism was assessed in their ﬁrst year of school (mean age
5.13 years), using a puppet scenario in which a teacher criticises the child for making an error in school
work. Understanding of false belief and mixed emotions was assessed at the same time. One hundred
and thirteen of the children had been seen one year earlier in preschool, when comprehensive
assessments were made of false belief and emotion understanding. Results: Individual differences were
apparent in children’s sensitivity to teacher criticism, which were correlated with individual differences
in both preschool and concurrent social cognition: children with more advanced social cognition were
more sensitive to teacher criticism. Regression analyses showed that preschool social cognition was
especially important, explaining unique variance in sensitivity to criticism over and above variance
accounted for by concurrent sociocognitive ability. Conclusions: The results suggest that there are
costs as well as beneﬁts to understanding other people, at least for young children, and that individual
differences in early social cognition may have distinct developmental trajectories. These issues, along
with implications for research into children’s responses to criticism and failure, are discussed.
Keywords: Individual differences, preschool children, school children, social cognition, theory of mind.

The ability to understand and interpret other
people’s thoughts, feelings, actions, intentions and
meaning is essential for successful social interaction
in human society. Research has shown that most
young children have developed a basic ‘theory of
mind’, enabling them to attribute independent
mental states, by around four or ﬁve years of age
(Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001; Flavell, 2000). It
is also apparent, however, that there are marked
individual differences in social understanding at this
age (e.g., Bartsch & Estes, 1996; Cutting & Dunn,
1999). Some young children show much less un-
derstanding of the intentions, feelings and mental
states of the people around them than do others of
their age. The importance of individual differences in
understanding of mind and emotion is now ac-
knowledged (e.g., Astington, 1993, 2001). Recent
research has shown that individual differences in
these aspects of social understanding have distinct
correlates, and are meaningful in children’s everyday
lives. For example, individual differences in under-
standing of mind and emotion have been related to
differences in the quantity and quality of children’s
pretend play (Astington & Jenkins, 1995; Hughes &
Dunn, 1997; Youngblade & Dunn, 1995), to chil-
dren’s friendship interactions (Dunn & Cutting,
1999), social skills (Watson, Nixon, Wilson, & Ca-
page, 1999; Lalonde & Chandler, 1995), and to their
moral sensibility (Dunn, Brown, & Maguire, 1995;
Dunn, Cutting, & Demetriou, 2000). The origins of
individual differences in social understanding are

not fully understood, but both genetic and environ-
mental inﬂuences have been shown to contribute
(Hughes & Cutting, 1999). More proximally, factors
such as verbal ability (Happe´, 1995; Jenkins & As-
tington, 1996), family background (Cutting & Dunn,
1999), and family talk about inner states (Dunn,
Brown, Slomkowski, Tesla, & Youngblade, 1991)
have been found to predict individual differences in
theory of mind and emotion understanding.

Somewhat less is known about the sequelae of
individual differences in early social understanding.
What implications does a well-developed (or limited)
understanding of other people’s thoughts, intentions
and feelings have for young children’s lives? Are
there long-term implications as well as short-term
effects? It has been argued that individual differ-
ences in emotional understanding and other aspects
of social cognition are implicated in problems in
children’s relationships with other children (e.g.,
Pettit, Bates, & Dodge, 1997; Rubin, Bukowski, &
Parker, 1998). Longitudinal studies also show that
the sequelae of individual differences in early social
understanding include differences in later mental-
state talk with friends, pretend play, and insight into
friendships (Dunn, 1995; Hughes & Dunn, 1997;
Dunn, Cutting, & Fisher, in press).

Although it is accepted that individual differences
in understanding of mind and emotion are import-
ant, there is a tacit assumption in much of the lit-
erature that a more advanced, or mature theory of
mind is an advantage. Being good at ‘reading minds’

Ó Association for Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 2002.
Published by Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA

850

Alexandra L. Cutting and Judy Dunn

and interpreting behaviour may well offer certain
advantages; a child who is sensitive to the thoughts
and feelings of those around her may ﬁnd it easier to
get along with her peers, make friends, or get her
own point of view across, for example. However, it is
also possible that having a well-developed under-
standing of other people’s thoughts, intentions and
feelings could be a disadvantage in some situations.
In the often competitive, rough-and-tumble world of
early childhood, it is possible that an advanced and
accurate understanding of other children’s motives,
or an early sensitivity to disparaging remarks and
less-than-pure intentions,
for example, may be
damaging to a sense of self that is only just devel-
oping. To a child with a well-developed ability to
interpret others’ behaviour, the social world may
sometimes seem a hostile place. Consistent with this
possibility, Dunn (1995) found that ability to explain
false belief at 40 months correlated with self-reports of
negative experiences in kindergarten two years later.
One area in which advanced social cognition may
be a disadvantage for young children is with respect
to criticism. When young children start school, one
of the major challenges they face is learning to cope
with criticism, however constructive, of their work,
and sometimes of their abilities. How children meet
this challenge, and respond to failure, is known to
have serious long-term consequences, which can
extend beyond childhood (Dweck, 1986). Children
with mature sociocognitive understanding, who are
more able to ‘read into’ what their teacher says, may
take criticism to heart more seriously than children
who are less able to interpret other people’s opinions
and comments. Alternatively, well-developed social
cognition may help children to deal with criticism;
maybe children who are better at understanding
others will be more able to rationalise teacher criti-
cism, and understand that criticism of school work
is generally intended to promote learning and
improvement.

Until recently, it had been thought that children
under the age of 9 or 10 years were relatively im-
mune to the effects of criticism and failure, largely
because younger children were not thought to be
capable of invariant trait conceptions (see Burhans
& Dweck, 1995, for a review). Recent work by Dweck
and her colleagues, however, has established that
children as young as 4 or 5 years of age are sensitive
to criticism, and that there are distinct patterns and
individual differences in young children’s responses
to failure (Smiley & Dweck, 1994; Burhans & Dweck,
1995; Kamins & Dweck, 1999). Some children show
a ‘mastery-oriented’ pattern of response. These
children are likely to maintain positive affect in the
face of failure, are more persistent in their problem-
solving, expect that their performance will improve
with future effort, and are more likely to attribute
failure to lack of effort or task difﬁculty than to de-
ﬁciencies in their own ability. A second group of
children show a ‘helpless’ pattern of response to

failure. In the face of failure, helpless children are
likely to experience negative affect, engage in negat-
ive self-cognitions, give up easily and do not expect
future success. While the helpless pattern of re-
sponding is not necessarily ‘set in stone’ (it can be
altered by support and training, for example (Ames,
1990, cited in Smiley & Dweck, 1994)), it has been
shown to carry long-term consequences, and is
considered to be maladaptive in the school learning
environment (Burhans & Dweck, 1995).

Exploring these response patterns, Heyman,
Dweck, and Cain (1992) examined group differences
in young children’s responses to criticism from
teachers, comparing children who did not appear to
take teacher criticism into account when rating their
own work with children who downgraded their own
appraisal of their work following teacher criticism.
Children who were sensitive to criticism displayed an
overall response pattern similar to that shown by
helpless children in response to failure – they re-
ported negative affect, rated themselves as ‘bad’, and
were less persistent. Burhans and Dweck (1995)
propose that the helpless pattern of responding is
intimately linked to children’s feelings of self-worth,
in particular to feelings of contingent self-worth (i.e.,
the belief that one’s self-worth is dependent on the
success or failure of one’s achievements). How others
judge one’s achievements – with criticism or praise,
they argued, has a large inﬂuence on one’s sense of
self-worth.

However, this explanation pre-supposes an ability
to infer and interpret other people’s beliefs from their
comments, and young children differ markedly in
their ability to do this (Riggs & Robinson, 1995).
Sensitivity to criticism at age 4 or 5 may thus reﬂect
a child’s sociocognitive ability, rather than (or as well
as) the belief that one’s self-worth is contingent upon
other people’s judgements. A child who does not
display a helpless pattern of response in the face of
criticism may indeed have a more robust sense of
self-worth than a ‘helpless’ child. Alternatively, that
child may simply have failed to interpret a critical
comment, effectively not noticing its implications. If
this is correct, then children who are particularly
sensitive to criticism should be good at inferring and
interpreting other people’s beliefs – that is, they
would be expected to have relatively mature social
cognition. Only one study has examined this link to
our knowledge. Dunn (1995) assessed children’s
ability to explain false belief at 40 months. As well as
ﬁnding that this predicted children’s reports of neg-
ative experiences in kindergarten, Dunn noted that
these children were also more sensitive to teacher
criticism, in that they were more likely to take ac-
count of such criticism when rating the quality of
their own work. This study was small
in scale,
however, and the ﬁnding requires replication.

In this study we examine whether early under-
standing of mind and emotion predicts later sensi-
tivity to criticism – in this case, teacher criticism in

Social Cognition Special Section: Social cognition and sensitivity to criticism

851

primary school – in a large sample of children from
diverse family backgrounds. Criticism has both a
cognitive intentional component and an emotional
component. We therefore made comprehensive
assessments of several aspects of social cognition,
including
false belief understanding, affective
perspective-taking, and understanding of emotional
causes and mixed emotions. We used a version of
Heyman et al.’s (1992) method to assess children’s
responses to teacher criticism, examining whether
children took criticism into account when rating
their work and ability, and also their emotional
response to the criticism. We expected that there
would be signiﬁcant associations between children’s
social cognition and their response to criticism;
speciﬁcally, we predicted that children with more
advanced sociocognitive skills would be more sensi-
tive to criticism than children with less mature social
cognition. The only previous study to suggest a link
between sensitivity to criticism and social cognition
(Dunn, 1995) found that early understanding of false
belief predicted later sensitivity to criticism. Since
this link may actually be via association with current
understanding of false belief, we assessed children’s
sociocognitive skills both prior to assessing sensi-
tivity to criticism, and concurrently.

Method

Participants

One hundred and forty-one children (mean age
5.13 years, range 4.42–5.72) took part in this study.
The children attended primary schools in South Lon-
don, and were participating in a longitudinal study of
friendship. Children came about equally from middle
class and working class backgrounds, the latter inclu-
ding some neighbourhoods of considerable urban de-
privation. Sixty-eight per cent were White, 26% were
Black or Mixed race, and 6% were from other ethnic
groups. One hundred and thirteen of the children had
been seen a year previously, in nursery school (mean
age 4.16 years); 28 children were newly recruited to the
study.

Procedure

Data were collected at two time points;
initially in
preschool, and then a year later, after children had
made the transition to primary school.

Time 1: Preschool measures. Children were seen
twice in preschool (visits conducted, on average, 1 week
apart) and once at home (on average, 3 weeks later). A
battery of false belief and emotion understanding tests
was administered over the course of
these visits.
Information on family background was collected from
parents. Not every test or questionnaire was completed,
for various reasons (e.g., absence from school), so the N
varied slightly across tasks.

Time 1 theory of mind tasks. In this study, preschool
theory of mind ability was indexed by an aggregate

score of children’s success on a total of seven false belief
tasks, all of which involved predicting, explaining or
recalling a false belief. The tasks included four unex-
pected location tasks (2 prediction, 2 explanation),
based on those of Bartsch and Wellman (1989), and
three unexpected contents false belief tasks, two based
on tasks by Harris, Johnson, Hutton, Andrews, and
Cooke (1989), and the ‘Can’t sleep’ task from Hughes,
Dunn, and White (1998). These tasks are described in
full detail in Cutting and Dunn (1999) (where their
interrelations were explored). Brieﬂy, in a typical unex-
pected location task, children were presented with a
prototypical box and a plain box, and shown that the
prototypical box was empty, while the plain box con-
tained the item in question. They were then asked
where a puppet, who was ignorant of the contents,
would search for the item (or why the puppet was
searching in the prototypical box), and where the item
was really located. In the unexpected contents tasks,
the contents of a container were swapped in a charac-
ter’s absence. Children were then asked what the
character thought was in the container, and what it
really contained. In the ‘Can’t sleep’ task, children were
shown the pages of a story book, each of which had a
hole through which an animal’s eye could be seen. On
the last page, what appeared to be another eye trans-
pired to be a spot on a snake’s tail. Children were asked
what a puppet would think he could see through the
hole before the last page was turned, and what it was
really. In all cases, both the test and reality control
questions must be answered correctly to pass the task.
Children scored 1 point for each false belief task
passed, except in the 2 explanation tasks where 2
points were awarded for spontaneous explanations and
1 for prompted explanations. Inter-task correlations
were high, with virtually every task correlating signiﬁ-
cantly (p < .01) with every other task; Cronbach’s alpha
was .80. Together, the 7 tasks provided children with a
maximum of 9 points. An aggregate score was calcu-
lated for each child by pro-rating the child’s mean score
(excluding tasks where the child failed the control
questions, or did not complete the task) to give an
equivalent score out of 9.

Time 1 emotion understanding. Two procedures were
used to assess children’s emotion understanding. First,
children’s affective perspective-taking ability was as-
sessed using Denham’s (1986) task. Children had to
name and indicate four emotions (happy, sad, angry
and scared) illustrated on felt faces. A puppet then
enacted 16 vignettes portraying situations in which the
protagonist felt happiness, sadness, anger or fear, such
as going to the zoo, seeing a parent off on a trip, having
a toy hidden by a sibling, or having a bad dream.
Children had to identify how the puppet felt in each
vignette. In the ﬁrst 8 vignettes, the puppet felt what
most children would typically feel in the given situation.
In the other 8 vignettes the puppet’s emotion differed
from the emotion that
the mother said the child
typically expressed in such a situation (established
beforehand by interviewing the mother). For each
vignette in Denham’s procedure, children scored 2
points for a correct emotional identiﬁcation, 1 for the
correct valence but wrong speciﬁc emotion (e.g., ‘sad’
instead of ‘scared’), and zero for a completely incorrect
answer (e.g., ‘happy’ instead of ‘angry’). Scores were

852

Alexandra L. Cutting and Judy Dunn

summed across the 16 affective perspective-taking
scenarios (maximum score ¼ 32; Cronbach’s alpha
¼ .73).
The second procedure used to examine children’s
emotion understanding was an interview based on that
used by Cassidy, Parke, Butkovsky, and Braungart
(1992).
In this interview, children were asked to
identify each of four emotions (happy, sad, angry and
scared), and were asked what made themselves, their
mothers and their friends feel each emotion (see Dunn
& Hughes, 1998, for fuller details). Children’s respons-
es were recorded and transcribed verbatim. The ad-
equacy of each response was coded on a 5-point scale
in which 0 ¼ no response, denial; 1 ¼ poor response,
including irrelevant remarks, misunderstanding the
causal nature of question, or suggesting a very
unlikely cause; 2 ¼ adequate response,
including
one-word or simple causes which were appropriate
and plausible (e.g., friend, scared: ‘Monsters’); 3 ¼
including relevant appropriate sen-
good response,
tence, or more than one adequate response (e.g.,
mother, happy: ‘When someone bought her ﬂowers’);
4 ¼ excellent response, including elaborate response
or evidence of insight (e.g., self, happy: ‘Fireworks.
They’re gonna be at the one o’clock club. I’ll be very
happy because I haven’t seen it before’). Scores were
summed across all 4 emotions and 3 people to give a
total understanding of emotional causes score (maxi-
mum score ¼ 48). Agreement on coding was assessed
by two coders rating transcripts from 25 children;
Cohen’s kappa was .87.

Verbal ability. Children’s verbal skills were assessed
using a measure of receptive vocabulary (long form of
the British Picture Vocabulary Scale (BPVS: Dunn,
Dunn, Whetton, & Pintilie, 1982)).

Family background. Family background information
was collected when a child joined the study and was
assessed using four indicators: mother’s and father’s
occupational class and education level. Whilst it is true
that occupation and education do not necessarily
correlate with income level, in British samples occupa-
tional class, which is highly correlated with educational
level, ‘has proved robust as a marker variable for socio-
economic position’ (Ofﬁce of Population Censuses and
Surveys, 1991, vol. 3, p. 11). Parental occupational
class was classiﬁed using the Standard Occupational
Classiﬁcation (Ofﬁce of Population Censuses and Sur-
veys, 1991). Categories included skilled and unskilled
manual or non-manual positions, managerial or tech-
nical positions, and professional positions. In cases
where a parent was not currently working, most recent
occupation was categorised. Parental educational level
was classiﬁed according to the following scheme: no
qualiﬁcations, up to GCSE/O level (national examina-
tions taken at 15/16 years), up to A level (equivalent to
United States high school graduation), degree or higher.
A principal components analysis of the four indicators
yielded a single family background factor that explained
71.2% of the variance in the items. The four indicators
were therefore standardised and averaged to yield a
single family background composite, with higher scores
corresponding to higher socio-economic status and
education. In broad terms, the sample at the current
time point was 46% working class and 54% middle
class.

In each case,

Time 2: School measures. Sensitivity to criticism.
Children’s sensitivity to teacher criticism was assessed
1.5–2 terms after starting primary school, using a
procedure based on Heyman et al. (1992). Children
were presented with two interactive puppet scenarios in
which they pretended to work hard to create a product
(writing numbers or drawing a family), but made a small
error (leaving out a number or missing the feet off a
person).
the story was told by the
experimenter in the second person, and the puppet
was given the child’s own name. Children were asked to
imagine that they were the puppet, which was then
used to enact the story. Once the product was created,
it was shown, with pride, to a puppet teacher. One
scenario ended at that point, without a response from
the teacher. In the other scenario, the teacher pointed
out the error and criticised the child (e.g., ‘The number
2 is missing. That’s not what I call writing numbers the
right way. I’m disappointed in you’). The two scenarios
(failure without and with criticism – henceforth referred
to as ‘failure’ and ‘criticism’ respectively) were presented
in counterbalanced order. After each scenario, children
were asked a series of questions which required them to
reﬂect upon how they felt, and how they rated their own
ability, after the criticism/failure incident. First, chil-
dren were asked whether they felt happy, sad, or angry
about what had happened, with a forced choice answer
(yes or no) for each emotion. One point was given for
each positive response (feeling happy, not feeling sad,
not feeling angry), the points being summed to reﬂect
overall quality of Emotional Response (0 ¼ most
negative, 3 ¼ most positive). Second, children were
asked to assign their imaginary product a grade (tick or
cross), and to rate their ability at the activity as ‘good or
not good’. Again, one point was assigned for each
positive response (tick, ‘good’), and these were summed
to give an overall Ability Rating (0 ¼ most negative, 2
¼ most positive). Finally, children were asked for a
Teacher Response; they were given the teacher puppet
and told ‘Now you are the teacher. What would you do
and say to (child’s name)?’ Spoken responses were
recorded and transcribed verbatim, and any physical
responses were noted (e.g., hitting or hugging the child
puppet). Children’s teacher responses were coded as
follows: 0 ¼ no response, irrelevant response or ‘don’t
know’ (these responses were subsequently treated as
missing data); 1 ¼ strongly negative (aggressive criti-
cism, punishment, threats and insults, and physical
violence); 2 ¼ mildly negative (pointing out the error,
telling the child to re-do the product, mild critical
comments); 3 ¼ neutral (comments such as ‘Oh yes’ or
‘ Thank you’, and comments of indeterminate valence);
4 ¼ positive (praise, encouragement, treating the error
as an amusing joke). Coding reliability was checked by
double-coding 25 scripts; agreement between coders
was 100%. Finally, following Heyman et al.’s (1992)
procedure, to ensure that children did not leave the test
session feeling bad, children imagined they were the
child puppet again, and completed a puzzle success-
fully. The teacher puppet then admired the puzzle,
complimented the child and apologised for the earlier
criticism.

Time 2 theory of mind (ﬁrst- and second-order false
belief). Children’s false belief understanding at the
second time point was tested using two story book false

Social Cognition Special Section: Social cognition and sensitivity to criticism

853

belief tasks (based on Sullivan, Zaitchik, & Tager-
Flusberg, 1994). Each story involved ﬁrstly a ﬁrst-order
false belief, then a second-order false belief. Children
were questioned about both false beliefs. In one story,
John (falsely) tells Mary some chocolate is in the fridge,
when in fact he put it in a tin. Children were asked
where Mary thought the chocolate was (ﬁrst-order false
belief), plus a reality control question (where is the
chocolate really?). If both questions were passed, the
story proceeded to a second-order false belief: Mary
then sees John taking chocolate from the tin, without
him realising that she has seen. Children were then
asked a second-order false belief question (Where does
John think Mary will look for the chocolate?), and two
further control questions. Children were credited with
one point for correct answers to each false belief
question, providing they also passed all control ques-
tions. Scores were summed across the two stories
(maximum score ¼ 4).

Time 2 emotion understanding: mixed emotions. A
story-telling interview based on that developed by
Gordis, Rosen, and Grand (1989) was used to assess
children’s understanding of situations in which a
person can feel two emotions of opposite valence. Two
sets of stories were presented; in the ﬁrst set, children
were explicitly told that the protagonist felt two con-
ﬂicting emotions and were asked to explain why. In the
second set, children were told stories, and asked what
the character felt (the correct answer being two con-
ﬂicting emotions). There were three stories in each set.
Finally children were asked whether they had ever
experienced both a positive and a negative emotion at
the same time, and if so, to describe the occasion.
Children’s responses were tape-recorded and tran-
scribed. For the six stories, scores were 0 for no
emotions explained/stated, 1 for one emotion, or 2 for
two opposite-valenced emotions for each story. In the
‘own story’ condition, 2 points were given if the children
provided plausible explanations for
two opposite-
valenced emotions. Children’s responses were summed
across the three conditions (maximum possible score
¼ 14 points, Cronbach’s alpha for the scale ¼ .74).
Time 2 verbal ability. Children’s verbal skills were
assessed again at time 2, using the long form of the
British Picture Vocabulary Scale (BPVS: Dunn, Dunn,
Whetton, & Pintilie, 1982).

Results

We ﬁrst present descriptive results for the social
cognition and background measures. These are fol-
lowed by an analysis of the sensitivity to criticism
task, and an examination of links between sensitivity
to criticism and both early and concurrent social
cognition.

Social cognition and background measures

A wide range of individual differences was apparent
in all of the social cognition measures. Means and
standard deviations for each domain are shown in
Table 1, along with background measures (family
background, language and age). The various measures

Table 1 Descriptive statistics for social cognition and back-
ground measures

Measure

M

SD

Range

Time 1 – Preschool

Theory of mind time 1
Affective perspective-

taking

Emotional causes
BPVS time 1
Family background
Agea

Time 2 – School

Theory of mind time 2
Mixed emotions
BPVS time 2
Agea

3.82
27.24

23.82
97.05
).08
4.17

1.36
8.37
98.90
5.13

2.91
3.73

9.39
11.98
3.30
.32

1.49
2.49
14.10
.30

0–9

13–32

0–41

71–131
)7.26–4.97
3.50–4.80

0–4
1–14

61–132
4.42–5.72

BPVS = British Picture Vocabulary Scale.
a Age in years.

of social cognition were signiﬁcantly positively
correlated, within and across time points, with two
exceptions.

Understanding of emotional causes in preschool
was not signiﬁcantly correlated with preschool af-
fective perspective-taking (r(104) ¼ .14) or with time
2 false belief understanding (r(107) ¼ .09), and time
2 false belief understanding was not signiﬁcantly
correlated with time 2 understanding of mixed
emotions (r(133) ¼ .04). Otherwise, all correlations
were signiﬁcant at p < .01 (r > .25). Of particular
relevance, the time 1 and time 2 measures of false
belief understanding were
signiﬁcantly related
(r(112) ¼ .25, p < .01), as were the time 1 and time 2
measures of emotion understanding (r(>100) > .30, p
< .01). All of the social cognition measures were
signiﬁcantly positively correlated with children’s
language scores (rs (>106) > .28, ps < .01), as would
be expected (e.g., Cutting & Dunn, 1999; Happe´,
1995). As a whole, this was also true for social cog-
nition and the family background factor, although
correlations did not reach signiﬁcance in the cases of
time 1 emotional causes or time 2 false belief.

Sensitivity to criticism

The results of the criticism and failure task are
shown in Table 2 (note that lower scores indicate
more negative responses, and thus greater sensitiv-
ity to criticism/failure). Preliminary analysis showed
that neither gender nor presentation order of the
scenarios affected the results, so these variables
were not included in the subsequent analysis. In
addition, children’s responses to criticism and fail-
ure were unrelated to their language scores (either
previously or concurrently), age, or their family
background.

Paired t-tests comparing children’s responses to
criticism and failure conﬁrmed that the children re-
sponded more negatively when they were criticised:
t(140) ¼ )7.28, p < .001;
Emotional Response,

854

Alexandra L. Cutting and Judy Dunn

Table 2 Descriptive statistics for sensitivity to criticism task

Emotional Response
Ability Rating
Teacher Response

M

1.15
.67
1.87

Criticism

(SD)

(1.01)
(.81)
(1.08)

Failure (no criticism)

Range

0–3
0–2
1–4

M

1.92
1.23
2.53

(SD)

(1.10)
(.85)
(1.22)

Range

0–3
0–2
1–4

Lower score denotes more negative response.

Table 3 Correlations between responses to criticism/failure and social cognition measures

Measure

Time 1 – Preschool

Theory of mind time 1
Affective perspective-taking
Emotional causes

Time 2 – School

Theory of mind time 2
Mixed emotions

** p < .01; * p < .05; + p < .06.

Emotional
Response

).07
.00
).03

).14
).02

Criticism

Ability
Rating

).24*
).29**
).21*

).20*
).02

Teacher
Response

Emotional
Response

).10
).12
.07

).18+
.23*

).21*
).16
).04

).08
).17*

Failure

Ability
Rating

).18+
).27**
.03

.03
).07

Teacher
Response

.09
).22*
.04

.05
.08

Ability Rating, t(131) ¼ )6.39, p < .001; Teacher
Response, t(106) ¼ )4.88, p < .001. Individual dif-
ferences were also apparent, as is clear from the
distribution of scores shown in Table 2.

Within the criticism task, children’s Emotional
Response was related to their Ability Rating (r(134)
¼ .45, p < .01), but neither was signiﬁcantly related
to the Teacher Response. Within the failure task,
Emotional Response and Ability Rating were again
quite strongly related (r(133) ¼ .45, p < .01); both
were signiﬁcantly correlated with Teacher Response,
but only weakly so (rs ¼ .20 and .22, ps < .05, for
Emotional Response and Ability Rating respectively).

Does social cognition predict sensitivity to criticism?

Having established that children had noticed, and
responded to, the criticism, we addressed the prin-
cipal question of the study – whether children’s
sensitivity to criticism was predicted by their social
cognition. Our prediction was that this would be the
case, and more speciﬁcally, that children with more
advanced social cognition would prove more sensi-
tive to criticism. The most fundamental
index of
children’s response to criticism is their Ability
Rating, which reﬂects directly on their perception of
self. We expected that this variable in particular
would be predicted by children’s sociocognitive
ability, since children better able to interpret another
person’s comments, thoughts and feelings should be
more able, and likely, to interpret the criticism as
reﬂecting upon themselves and their ability.

Initially, we examined correlations between chil-
dren’s responses in the criticism and failure scen-
arios, and their social cognition concurrently and
as preschoolers. These correlations are shown in

Table 3. Verbal ability, age at each time point, and
family background are not included in the table,
since they did not correlate signiﬁcantly with any
measure of response to criticism or failure.1

Examining Table 3, it can be seen that the overri-
ding pattern of association between children’s social
cognition and sensitivity to criticism is one of neg-
ative correlation.
In other words, children with
higher social cognition scores were more sensitive to
criticism. A similar pattern holds for sensitivity to
failure (without criticism), but it is less clear. It must
be noted, however, that the correlations shown in
Table 3 are individually very modest, and with
Bonferroni corrections applied for multiple testing,
several fall below signiﬁcance. This is not to say that
social cognition as a whole does not predict sensi-
tivity to criticism, however. In order to test our a
priori hypothesis directly, we ran a series of hier-
archical multiple regressions. For each of the out-
come variables in the criticism task (Emotional
Response, Ability Rating and Teacher Response), we
ran two regressions. In the ﬁrst regression, the pre-
school social cognition measures (theory of mind,
affective perspective-taking, emotional causes) were
entered as predictors in a single block. In the second

1Although verbal ability did not correlate signiﬁcantly with the
children’s responses to criticism and failure, it was correlated
positively with the measures of social cognition at each time
point, as would be expected. For the sake of caution, the
correlations shown in Table 3 were re-run, partialling out
verbal ability at each time point. The pattern of correlations
remained the same in terms of signiﬁcance for all correlations
bar one (the correlation between Ability Rating when criticised
and Emotional Causes now fell just below signiﬁcance, at
p < .08).

Social Cognition Special Section: Social cognition and sensitivity to criticism

855

regression, we entered the concurrent social cogni-
tion measures (theory of mind, mixed emotions) as
predictors, again in a single block. For comparative
purposes, the same series of regressions were run for
the failure (without criticism) task. The results are
shown in Table 4.

The results of the regressions indicate that the
social cognition variables taken together do predict
sensitivity to criticism. The direction of effect – one of
negative association – is clear from the correlation
table (see Table 3).

The primary index of children’s sensitivity to cri-
ticism, their Ability Rating in the face of criticism, was
clearly predicted by both early (preschool, age four)
social cognition and concurrent (one year later, age
ﬁve) social cognition, although preschool social cog-
nition appears to be a stronger predictor (see
Table 4). But does the link with preschool social
cognition reﬂect an early ability that has a distinct
developmental trajectory, and leaves children espe-
cially sensitive to later criticism, or are these do-
mains simply linked by association with concurrent
social cognition? In other words, does early social
cognition contribute independently to children’s
sensitivity to criticism, explaining variance beyond
that which can be attributed to concurrent social
cognition? In order to investigate the relative contri-
butions of early and concurrent social understand-
ing, we ran a further set of regressions with Ability
Rating when criticised as the dependent variable.
Initially, we entered the preschool social cognition
measures (theory of mind, affective perspective-
taking, emotional causes) and the concurrent social
cognition measures (theory of mind, mixed emotions)
together, in order to establish the total variance ex-
plained by these variables in combination. Ten per
cent of the variance in children’s Ability Ratings fol-
lowing criticism was explained by these variables
(adjusted R2 ¼ .10, F (5,88) ¼ 3.04, p < .02). The
preschool social cognition variables were then sep-
arated into a second step, to investigate whether they
contributed signiﬁcant unique variance, beyond that
explained by the concurrent social cognition meas-
ures. The same process was repeated with the con-
current variables, to establish whether they also
contributed unique variance to children’s response

to criticism. The results showed that preschool
social cognition did contribute signiﬁcant variance
over and above that contributed by concurrent so-
cial cognition (D R2 ¼ .076, D F ¼ 2.61, p < .05).
Concurrent social cognition however, did not con-
tribute signiﬁcant unique variance (D R2 ¼ .024,
D F ¼ 1.23, ns).

Children’s Ability Ratings in response to failure
were not predicted by their concurrent social under-
standing, but were predicted by preschool social
cognition: children with more advanced sociocogni-
tive abilities as preschoolers were signiﬁcantly more
likely to rate themselves poorly following failure.

Children’s Emotional Response to being criticised
was not signiﬁcantly predicted by either the pre-
school sociocognitive measures, or concurrent social
cognition. Children with less well-developed social
cognition were just as upset (or unaffected) at being
criticised as those with more mature social under-
standing. However, this may be an artefact of the
methodology used. Children were asked how they
felt about ‘what happened with the (e.g.) picture’
prior to the three forced-choice options of happy, sad
and angry. The experimenters felt that at least some
children interpreted this question to be referring to
the speciﬁc error they had made rather than to the
error plus critical teacher appraisal. The fact that
children’s Emotional Response in the face of failure
(when an error is made but is not criticised) was
predicted by concurrent social cognition supports
this possibility – examining the pattern of correla-
tions in Table 3, it appears that children who had a
greater concurrent understanding of mixed emotions
were more upset by failure (i.e., gave a less positive
Emotional Response in the Failure task). This is a
very small effect, however, so it should be viewed
with some caution.

The Teacher Responses that children produced
following criticism were predicted by concurrent so-
cial cognition. This relationship is difﬁcult to inter-
pret, however. Children with a better understanding
of mixed emotions gave more positive, supportive
Teacher Responses, but there was also a trend in the
opposite direction for children with higher concur-
rent theory of mind scores (see Table 3). Teacher
Responses following failure were not predicted by

Table 4 Regression analyses examining prediction of responses to criticism/failure by social cognition measures

Criticism

Failure

Emotional Response
Ability Rating
Teacher Response

Emotional Response
Ability Rating
Teacher Response

** p < .01; * p < .05.

Preschool social cognition (1 year earlier)

School social cognition (concurrent)

Adjusted R2

.030
.103
).001

.025
.050
.056

F

.001

4.75 **

.97

1.90
2.70 *
2.63

Adjusted R2

.006
.034
.084

.034
).011
).011

F

1.41
3.37 *
6.03 **

3.33 *

.33
.41

856

Alexandra L. Cutting and Judy Dunn

preschool or concurrent social cognition. This is
perhaps unsurprising, since in the failure condition,
the teacher did not respond to the error made by the
child, and there was thus little motivation for chil-
dren to give any speciﬁc type of Teacher Response.

Discussion

The aim of this study was to examine whether early
sociocognitive understanding predicted sensitivity to
criticism – in this case, teacher criticism in primary
school – in a sample of children from diverse family
backgrounds. The results indicate that early social
cognition does predict sensitivity to criticism. More
speciﬁcally, it was clear that the ﬁve-year-olds who
were most sensitive to teacher criticism were the
children who had more advanced social under-
standing, both at the time, and in preschool a year
earlier. Our results have implications for research
into criticism and self-worth, as well as for research
into social cognition.

The ﬁrst result worth noting is that, as a group, the
ﬁve-year-olds in this study were sensitive to criti-
cism; they reacted signiﬁcantly more negatively in
response to criticised failure than in response to
non-criticised failure, for all three measures taken
(their Emotional Response, Ability Rating and Tea-
cher Response). This ﬁnding supports recent reports
published by Dweck and colleagues (Smiley &
Dweck, 1994; Burhans & Dweck, 1995; Kamins &
Dweck, 1999), which claim that children as young as
four or ﬁve are sensitive to criticism. The diverse
range of family backgrounds involved in our study
also give stronger ecological validity to Dweck and
colleagues’ ﬁndings (whose subjects were from mid-
dle and upper-middle class families). Second, our
results suggest a signiﬁcant link between young
children’s response to criticism and their under-
standing of mind and emotion: children with more
advanced understanding of mind and emotion
showed greater sensitivity to criticism. Measures of
children’s theory of mind and emotion understand-
ing explained about 10% of variance in sensitivity to
criticism; clearly, social cognition does not fully ex-
plain individual differences in sensitivity to criticism,
but it is a signiﬁcant factor which has been largely
overlooked in research on response to criticism to
date.

Within the task used to assess children’s sensi-
tivity to teacher criticism, there were three measures
of the children’s responses – their Emotional Re-
sponse, Ability Rating and Teacher Response. Chil-
dren’s sociocognitive ability predicted some of these
measures but not others. How children responded
emotionally to teacher criticism was not predicted by
their earlier social cognition. This was unexpected,
but there are at least two potential explanations for
the lack of association. One explanation is that all
the children felt similarly upset when criticised, but

only those with good sociocognitive skills reﬂected on
the criticism, or interpreted it further. As such, it
may be that while all the children were able to tell us
how they felt following teacher criticism, only those
with good emotion understanding properly under-
stood or interpreted their own emotional response.
This would lead to the overall pattern of results seen.
A second possible explanation for the lack of corre-
lation between early social cognition and children’s
Emotional Responses is that some children may
have misunderstood the emotion questions. Anec-
dotally, testers noted that several children seemed to
be referring to making the error itself, rather than to
being criticised, when asked how they felt ‘about
what happened’. For example, one child reported
negative feelings and spontaneously added that this
was because ‘I don’t like making mistakes’; another
said he felt angry ‘cos I did it wrong’. This cannot
fully explain the results, as children reported signi-
ﬁcantly more negative feelings when criticised than
when there was no criticism, but may have had some
inﬂuence. As such, the lack of correlation between
children’s Emotional Response and social cognition
should be viewed with caution.

Children’s ratings of their own ability following
criticism were clearly predicted by their sociocogni-
tive skills, especially their abilities at age four (in
preschool): children with better developed theory of
mind and emotion understanding gave themselves
signiﬁcantly lower Ability Ratings following criticism.
The Ability Rating is the measure that most directly
reﬂects children’s sense of self-worth following the
criticism. Burhans and Dweck (1995) argue that
‘conceptions and goals pertaining to the self as a
whole and one’s general sense of self worth’ (p. 1731)
are critical
in determining helplessness in young
children, following failure or criticism, and speciﬁc-
ally, that ‘it is a sense of contingent worth that is the
earliest and most basic condition for helplessness to
occur [in young children]’ (p. 1736). It is noteworthy,
therefore, that children’s early sociocognitive ability
predicted their judgements of their own ability and
by inference their self-worth, following criticism. In
combination with Dweck and colleagues’ ﬁndings,
our results raise some interesting possibilities. The
most logical explanation of the links we found be-
tween social cognition and Ability Ratings is that
children who were more adept at representing belief
and emotions were more hurt by the criticism, as
they understood their own emotional response and
had a better understanding of the internal beliefs
and feelings which motivated the teacher’s criticism.
These children were more likely to say that the cri-
ticism made them feel that they were ‘not good’ at the
task in hand, which raises the possibility that ad-
vanced social cognition at a young age could be re-
lated to developing a sense of contingent self-worth.
Children’s representations of themselves, and their
self-concepts, are rapidly developing at the age when
they ﬁrst start school (Harter, 1998, 1999). Perhaps

Social Cognition Special Section: Social cognition and sensitivity to criticism

857

those with precocious social understanding, who are
particularly sensitive to other people’s meanings at a
time when their sense of self is not fully developed,
are more likely to ‘take on board’ what others say
about them, and build this into their sense of self.
This could potentially lead to a sense of contingent
self-worth, and ultimately a helpless pattern of
responding to future failure or criticism.

On the other hand, sensitivity to criticism is not
necessarily a bad thing – negative feedback is
important to learning as well as positive feedback.
Children who are more sensitive to criticism may be
in a better position to learn from constructive criti-
cism (and thus to improve their performance in the
longer term) than those who are less affected by
critical remarks. Within the context of social rela-
tionships, children who are more sensitive to criti-
cism may be better placed to react to criticism from
others and modify their behaviour accordingly –
raising the possibility that sensitivity to criticism is
one route via which young children exercise their
social cognition in social
interactions. There has
been very little research on this topic; the potential
effects, both negative and positive, of sensitivity to
criticism (and especially early sensitivity) are clearly
in need of further investigation. The ﬁndings repor-
ted here suggest that early sensitivity to criticism has
negative effects, in as much as children downgraded
their Ability Rating after being criticised, but this is
a short-term effect;
longer-term effects may not
necessarily all be negative.

The ﬁnal measure we took in the sensitivity to
criticism task was to ask children to take on the role
of the teacher and follow up the criticism with a
further response. There were wide individual differ-
ences in children’s Teacher Responses – some en-
acted the teacher giving positive encouragement or
praise, others enacted punishment and scolding. No
clear pattern emerged with respect to links between
children’s socio-cognitive ability and their Teacher
Responses. The only signiﬁcant correlation we found
was with children’s current understanding of mixed
emotions; those with better understanding of mixed
emotions gave more positive Teacher Responses. As
a whole, however, social cognition did not predict
children’s Teacher Responses. We suggest that Tea-
cher Responses may more directly reﬂect tempera-
mental and personality factors, or children’s real
experiences with their own teachers.

The results of this study also have implications for
research into social cognition and its development.
As noted in the introduction, there has been a ﬂurry
of recent research into predictors and correlates of
social understanding, but little is known about the
developmental consequences of understanding that
mental states such as beliefs and feelings inﬂuence
people’s behaviour. It might be assumed that gaining
this understanding has very broad developmental
beneﬁts. Clearly, social cognition is extremely
important – we know that individuals who have a

deﬁcit or delay in their social understanding (for
example, due to autism or deafness) experience
serious long-term difﬁculties as a result (Baron-
Cohen, 1989; Peterson & Siegal, 1998). The results
of this study demonstrate that normative individual
differences in children’s early social understanding
are also important for their future development, and
in addition, that having an advanced understanding
of the links between mind, emotion and behaviour
may have negative consequences as well as positive
results. Being able to understand the role of mental
states in determining behaviour allows children to
‘read minds’, and is an advantage in many ways,
such as allowing children to participate in shared
pretend play, develop closer friendships, empathise,
joke and comfort. At the same time, however, they
become aware of what other people think of and feel
about them, which may not always be positive.

In this study, we found that children’s preschool
social understanding is of particular signiﬁcance in
predicting sensitivity to criticism (explaining unique
variance over and above variance explained by con-
current social cognition). This indicates that devel-
opments in social understanding that are in place by
around four years of age may have a special signiﬁ-
cance: individual differences at this age may have
distinct developmental trajectories. This is not to say
that the level of early sociocognitive understanding a
child possesses at the age of four is determinative.
Indeed, a recent series of cross-sectional studies by
Bartsch and London (2000) suggests that children’s
ability to use their sociocognitive skills continues to
develop well beyond the preschool years. But our
results do suggest that early abilities are particularly
important in the realm of social understanding. The
pattern of results shown in Table 3 shows that the
children who had well-developed social cognition
skills as preschoolers were more sensitive to both
criticism and failure a year later (although the effect
was stronger for criticism), while those who had good
concurrent social cognition reacted only to the ex-
plicit criticism. This pattern suggests that having
more advanced sociocognitive skills at age four leads
children to have a different, but not necessarily more
advantageous, experience of the social world than
children whose early social understanding is less
advanced.

How children’s self-concepts and self-esteem re-
late to early social understanding may be an im-
portant avenue for future research. Do children with
greater sociocognitive skills early in life have more
fragile self-esteem at a later date, for example? These
children may be more sensitive to criticism, but is
that damaging, or actually a useful learning experi-
ence for an able child? Poorer social cognition has
been related to several less desirable outcomes, such
as disruptive behaviour and aggression (Arsenio &
Fleiss, 1996; Dodge & Frame, 1982; Hughes et al.,
1998), but can it also be an advantage in certain
situations? Do children with poorer social cognition

858

Alexandra L. Cutting and Judy Dunn

in the preschool years gain a serendipitous immu-
nity from the effect of criticism, for example? Could
this lead to a more positive sense of self, and explain
why some aggressive children have positive self-
esteem (Gresham, MacMillan, Bocian, Ward, &
Forness, 1998)?

A few comments should be made about

the
limitations of this study. A degree of caution is
warranted in interpreting the results, as the corre-
lations, although signiﬁcant and predictive in
nature, are very modest.
In the study’s favour,
however, is a large and socio-economically diverse
sample, which is rare in research in social cognition.
As well as further investigation of the ‘costs’ of
understanding other people, this study suggests
new avenues for research into young children’s
sensitivity to failure and criticism. It should be noted
that while we used very comprehensive measures of
social cognition, the sensitivity to criticism task was
relatively simple. The task has been shown to be
appropriate for children of this age (Heyman et al.,
1992), but it would obviously be sensible to employ
multiple measures to assess sensitivity to criticism
in future research. These could include tasks
designed to examine children’s responses to criti-
cism from other sources. We chose to investigate
teacher criticism in this study, since we felt it to be
especially salient for children who have just started
school, but it is by no means certain that children’s
responses to teacher criticism can be generalised
across sources. How young children cope with cri-
ticism from parents, peers, friends or siblings, for
example, remains largely unexplored. Criticism from
peers may be especially important, given the im-
portance of early peer relations for later development
(Rubin et al., 1998; Kupersmidt, Coie, & Dodge,
1990). Lastly, this study examined the inﬂuence of
individual differences in social understanding over
just one year. This is a particularly important year in
the life of a young child, involving the transition to
school, but future studies will need to examine
longer-term sequelae of
individual differences in
social understanding.

In summary, the results of this study indicate
signiﬁcant links between early social cognition and
children’s later sensitivity to criticism. This is the
ﬁrst clear indication, to our knowledge, that there
may be costs as well as beneﬁts to understanding
other people well, early in life. There have been
suggestions that good sociocognitive skills can be
put to bad use, for example by some types of bully
(Sutton, Smith, & Swettenham, 1999), and that
some children may have a ‘theory of nasty minds’,
showing better sociocognitive ability within negative
domains such as antisocial behaviour (Happe´ &
Frith, 1996) or mean tricks (Hughes et al., 1998).
Our results suggest that even within a normative
population, there may be a downside to well-devel-
oped or precocious social cognition. The extent of this
‘downside’ and its long-term implications require

further investigation if we are to understand fully the
role of social cognition in everyday life.

Acknowledgements

This study was supported by a grant to Judy Dunn
from the National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development (grant HD23158). We would
like to thank all the families and schools who parti-
cipated in the study, and the researchers and staff
involved in The Friendship Project. The data for this
study were collected while both the authors were at
the Institute of Psychiatry.

Correspondence to

Alexandra Cutting, Department of Psychology, Uni-
versity of Reading, Earley Gate, Whiteknights,
Reading RG6 6AL, UK; Tel: 0118 931 6225; Fax:
0118 931 6715; Email: a.l.cutting@reading.ac.uk

References

Arsenio, W., & Fleiss, K. (1996). Typical and behaviour-
ally disruptive children’s understanding of the emo-
tional consequences of socio-moral events. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 14, 173–186.

Astington, J.W. (1993). The child’s discovery of the

mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Astington, J.W. (2001). The future of theory-of-mind
research: Understanding motivational states, the role
of
language, and real-world consequences. Child
Development, 72, 685–687.

Astington, J.W., & Jenkins, J.M. (1995). Theory of mind
development and social understanding. Cognition
and Emotion, 9, 151–165.

Baron-Cohen, S. (1989). The autistic child’s theory of
mind: A case of speciﬁc developmental delay. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 30, 285–297.

Bartsch, K., & Estes, D. (1996). Individual differences
in children’s developing theory of mind and implica-
tions for metacognition. Learning and Individual
Differences, 8, 281–304.

Bartsch, K., & London, K. (2000). Children’s use of
mental state information in selecting persuasive
arguments. Developmental Psychology, 36, 352–365.
Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. (1989). Young children’s
attribution of action to beliefs and desires. Child
Development, 60, 946–964.

Burhans, K.K., & Dweck, C.S. (1995). Helplessness in
early childhood: The role of contingent worth. Child
Development, 66, 1719–1738.

Cassidy, J.C., Parke, R.D., Butkovsky, L., & Braungart,
J.M. (1992). Family-peer connections: The roles of
emotional expressiveness within the family and chil-
dren’s understanding of emotions. Child Develop-
ment, 63, 603–618.

Cutting, A.L., & Dunn, J.

(1999). Theory of mind,
emotion understanding, language and family back-
ground: Individual differences and inter-relations.
Child Development, 70, 853–865.

Social Cognition Special Section: Social cognition and sensitivity to criticism

859

Denham, S.A. (1986). Social cognition, prosocial be-
havior, and emotion in preschoolers: Contextual
validation. Child Development, 57, 194–201.

Dodge, K.A., & Frame, C. (1982). Social cognitive biases
and deﬁcits in aggressive boys. Child Development,
51, 620–635.

Dunn, J. (1995). Children as psychologists: The later
correlates of individual differences in understanding
of emotions and other minds. Cognition and Emotion,
9, 187–201.

Dunn, J., Brown, J., Slomkowski, C., Tesla, C., &
Youngblade, L. (1991). Young children’s understand-
ing of other people’s feelings and beliefs: Individual
differences and their antecedents. Child Development,
62, 1352–1366.

Dunn, J., Brown, J.R., & Maguire, M. (1995). The
development of children’s moral sensibility: Individ-
ual differences and emotion understanding. Develop-
mental Psychology, 31, 649–659.

Dunn, J., & Cutting, A.L. (1999). Understanding others,
and individual differences in friendship interactions
in young children. Social Development, 8, 201–219.

Dunn, J., Cutting, A.L., & Demetriou, H. (2000). Moral
sensibility, understanding others, and children’s
friendship interactions in the preschool period.
British Journal Of Developmental Psychology, 18,
159–177.

Dunn, J., Cutting, A.L., & Fisher, N. (in press). Old
friends, new friends: Predictors of children’s perspec-
tives on their friends at school. Child Development.

Dunn, L.M., Dunn, L.M., Whetton, C., & Pintilie, D.
(1982). British picture vocabulary scale. Windsor, UK:
NFER-Nelson.

Dunn, J., & Hughes, C.

(1998). Young children’s
understanding of emotions within close relationships.
Cognition and Emotion, 12, 171–190.

Dweck, C.S.

(1986). Motivation processes affecting

learning. American Psychologist, 41, 1040–1048.

Flavell, J.H. (2000). Development of children’s know-
ledge about the mental world. International Journal of
Behavioral Development, 24, 15–23.

Gordis, F.W., Rosen, A.B., & Grand, S. (1989). Young
children’s understanding of simultaneous conﬂicting
emotions. Paper presented at the Biennial meeting
of the Society for Research in Child Development.
Kansas City, MO, April.

Gresham, F.M., MacMillan, D.L., Bocian, K.M., Ward,
S.L., & Forness, S.R. (1998). Comorbidity of hyper-
activity-impulsivity-inattention and conduct prob-
lems: Risk factors in social, affective, and academic
domains. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 26,
393–406.

Happe´, F.G.E. (1995). The role of age and verbal ability
in the theory of mind task performance of subjects
with autism. Child Development, 66, 843–855.

Happe´, F., & Frith, U. (1996). Theory of mind and social
impairment in children with conduct disorder. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 14, 385–398.

Harter, S. (1998). The development of self-representa-
tions. In W. Damon & N. Eisenberg (Eds.), Handbook
of child psychology (5th edn) volume 3: Social, emo-
tional and personality development (pp. 553–617).
New York: Wiley.

Harter, S. (1999). The construction of the self: A devel-

opmental perspective. London: Guildford Press.

Harris, P.L., Johnson, C., Hutton, D., Andrews, G., &
Cooke, T. (1989). Young children’s theory of mind and
emotion. Cognition and Emotion, 3, 379–400.
Heyman, G.D., Dweck, C.S., & Cain, K.M.

(1992).
Young children’s vulnerability to self-blame and
helplessness: Relationship to beliefs about goodness.
Child Development, 63, 401–415.

Hughes, C., & Cutting, A.L. (1999). Nature, nurture,
and individual differences in early understanding of
mind. Psychological Science, 10, 429–432.

Hughes, C., & Dunn, J. (1997). ‘Pretend you didn’t
know’: Preschoolers’ talk about mental states in
pretend play. Cognitive Development, 12, 381–403.

Hughes, C., Dunn, J., & White, A. (1998). Trick or
treat?: Uneven understanding of mind and emotion
and executive function among ‘hard to manage’
preschoolers. Journal of Child Psychology and Psy-
chiatry, 39, 981–994.

Jenkins, J.M., & Astington, J.W.

(1996). Cognitive
factors and family structure associated with theory
of mind development in young children. Developmen-
tal Psychology, 32, 70–78.

Kamins, M.L., & Dweck, C.S. (1999). Person versus
process praise and criticism: Implications for contin-
gent self-worth and coping. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 35, 835–847.

Kupersmidt, J.B., Coie, J.D., & Dodge, K.A. (1990). The
role of poor peer relationships in the development of
disorder.
In S.R. Asher & J.D. Coie (Eds.), Peer
rejection in childhood: Cambridge studies in social
and emotional development. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Lalonde, C.E., & Chandler, M.J. (1995). False belief
understanding goes to school: On the social-emo-
tional consequences of coming early or late to a ﬁrst
theory of mind. Cognition and Emotion, 9, 167–185.

Ofﬁce of Population Censuses and Surveys (1991).
London:

Standard Occupational Classiﬁcation.
HMSO.

Peterson, C.C., & Siegal, M. (1998). Changing focus on
the representational mind: Deaf, autistic and normal
children’s concepts of false photos, false drawings
and false beliefs. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 16, 301–320.

Pettit, G.S., Bates, J.E., & Dodge, K.A. (1997). Sup-
portive parenting, ecological context, and children’s
adjustment: A seven-year longitudinal study. Child
Development, 68, 908–923.

Riggs, K.J., & Robinson, E.J. (1995). What people say
and what they think: Children’s judgements of false
belief in relations to their recall of false messages.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 13, 271–
284.

interactions,

Rubin, K.H., Bukowski, W., & Parker, J.G. (1998).
Peer
In
W. Damon and N. Eisenberg (Eds.), Handbook of
child psychology (5th edn) volume 3: Social, emo-
tional and personality development (pp. 619–700).
New York: Wiley.

relationships and groups.

Smiley, P.A., & Dweck, C.S. (1994). Individual differ-
ences in achievement goals among young children.
Child Development, 65, 1723–1743.

Sullivan, K., Zaitchik, D., & Tager-Flusberg, H. (1994).
Preschoolers can attribute 2nd-order beliefs. Devel-
opmental Psychology, 30, 396–402.

860

Alexandra L. Cutting and Judy Dunn

Sutton, J., Smith, P.K., & Swettenham, J.

(1999).
Bullying and ‘theory of mind’: A critique of the ‘social
skills deﬁcit’ view of anti-social behaviour. Social
Development, 8, 117–127.

Watson, A.C., Nixon, C.L., Wilson, A., & Capage, L.
(1999). Social interaction skills and theory of mind
in young children. Developmental Psychology, 35,
386–391.

Wellman, H.M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-
analysis of theory-of-mind development: The truth

false belief. Child Development, 72, 655–

about
684.

Youngblade, L.M., & Dunn, J. (1995). Individual differ-
ences in young children’s pretend play with mother
and sibling: Links to relationships and understand-
ing of other people’s feelings and beliefs. Child Devel-
opment, 66, 1472–1492.

Manuscript accepted 22 October 2001

