 
 
Patterns of Change in Children's Social Reasoning: A Two-Year Longitudinal Study
Author(s): William Damon
Source: Child Development, Vol. 51, No. 4 (Dec., 1980), pp. 1010-1017
Published by: Wiley on behalf of the Society for Research in Child Development
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1129538
Accessed: 02-06-2020 09:10 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Society for Research in Child Development, Wiley are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Child Development

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 02 Jun 2020 09:10:57 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Articles

 Patterns of Change in Children's Social
 Reasoning: A Two-Year Longitudinal Study

 William Damon

 Clark University

 DAMON, WILLIAM. Patterns of Change in Children's Social Reasoning: A Two-Year Longitu-
 dinal Study. CHILD DEVELOPMENT, 1980, 51, 1010-1017. 34 boys and girls between the ages
 of 4 and 9 were interviewed on their conceptions of positive justice and parental authority and
 then reinterviewed 1 and 2 years later. Despite a number of no-changes and reversals from
 year to year on each interview, by the end of 2 years the clear tendency was toward progressive,
 stepwise movement along an ordered sequence of reasoning levels. Children who were initially
 scored at lower reasoning levels than others the same age tended to catch up to their peers in
 subsequent years; and movements of great magnitude in 1 year tended to be compensated by
 lateral or downward movement in the next. In any year, scattered reasoning at levels above a
 subject's modal reasoning level was positively related to progressive change in the subject's
 modal score in the following year. This finding, upheld for both positive justice and authority,
 suggests that reasoning spread in an upward direction is a good predictor of a subsequent de-
 velopmental transition, at least as regards concept acquisition within the social domain. It was
 concluded that even stagelike development in children's social reasoning proceeds gradually,
 with important continuities in children's social-cognitive performances from 1 year to the next.

 Previous studies (Damon 1975, 1977)

 have established age-related sequences of de-
 velopmental levels that characterize children's
 conceptions of positive justice and authority.
 The positive-justice conception centers around
 issues of sharing and the fair distribution of
 resources, whereas the authority conception
 centers around issues of legitimacy in leader-
 ship and the rationale for obedience. These
 particular social conceptions were originally
 chosen for study because of their dual impor-
 tance in children's social and moral interac-
 tions, and because taken together the two con-
 cepts represent children's emerging under-
 standing of child-child as well as adult-child
 relations.

 Although the sequence of positive-justice
 levels has much irf common with the sequence
 of authority levels (both progressions, e.g., rely
 partially on children's increasing abilities to
 distinguish and relate social perspectives), each

 sequence is to a large degree unique, dealing
 with its own peculiar social concerns. Empiri-
 cal findings have revealed that a child's de-
 velopmental status on one sequence can only
 approximately predict his or her progress on
 the other (Damon 1977, p. 357). For this rea-
 son, neither sequence may be reduced to the
 other, and the two have been presented and
 investigated separately as two related yet dis-
 tinct elements in children's social understand-
 ing. Tables 1 and 2 present brief descriptions
 of the two social-conceptual sequences.

 Prior evidence for the developmental na-
 ture of the two sequences has been both cross-
 sectional and longitudinal. The longitudinal
 evidence (Damon 1977) was the result of a
 1-year study in which children between the
 ages of 4 and 9 were interviewed on their con-
 ceptions of positive justice and authority and
 then reinterviewed 1 year later. Patterns of
 change at the end of the year indicated that,

 This study was made possible (in part) by funds granted by Carnegie Corporation of
 New York and by a general research and facilities grant (S. Wapner, Director) to Clark Uni-
 versity from the W. T. Grant Foundation. I would like to thank the following persons for
 interviewing children during one or another phase of this study: David Forbes, Randy Gerson,
 Ken Miller, Melanie Killen, Richard DeMartino, John Lau, Claire Seidenberg, Debra Mendlo-
 witz, and Beth Estey. Also, thanks to Dennis Wixon, Joseph Schmuller, John Lau, Melanie
 Killen, and Caroline Hogg for help in scoring and analyzing data. Author's address: Depart-
 ment of Psychology, Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts 01610.

 [Child Development, 1980, 51, 1010-1017. @ 1980 by the Society for Research in Child Development, Inc.
 0009-3920/80/5104-0005$01.001

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 02 Jun 2020 09:10:57 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 William Damon 1011

 for both concepts, children who changed tend-
 ed to do so in a forward direction, usually
 moving to the next highest level. But, particu-
 larly in the positive-justice area, a large num-
 ber of children did not change at all from 1
 year to the next. In addition, again most no-
 ticeably in the positive-justice area, a small but
 noticeable number of children scored lower on

 the second testing that they did on the first.
 Thus, although the trend toward positive move-
 ment among children who changed was con-
 firmed significantly for both concepts, there
 were a large number of no-changes in addition
 to some actual reversals. This led to caution
 in ascribing to the two conceptual sequences
 traditional features of stagelike development,

 TABLE 1

 BRIEF DESCRIPTIONS OF EARLY POSITIVE-JUSTICE LEVELS

 Level 0-A:

 Positive-justice choices derive from wish that an act occur. Reasons simply assert the wishes rather than attempt-

 ing to justify them ("I should get it because I want to have it").

 Level 0-B:

 Choices still reflect desires but are now justified on the basis of external, observable realities such as size, sex, or
 other physical characteristics of persons (e.g., we should get the most because we are girls). Such justifications,
 however, are invoked in a fluctuating, after-the-fact manner, and are self-serving in the end.

 Level 1-A:

 Positive-justice choices derive from notions of strict equality in actions (i.e., that everyone should get the same).

 Equality is seen as preventing complaining, fighting, "fussing," or other types of conflict.

 Positive-justice choices derive from a notion of reciprocity in actions: that persons should be paid back in kind

 for doing good or bad things. Notions of merit and deserving emerge.

 Level 1-B:

 Level 2-A:

 A moral relativity develops out of the understanding that different persons can have different, yet equally valid,

 justifications for their claims to justice. The claims of persons with special needs (e.g., the poor) are weighed
 heavily. Choices attempt quantitative compromises between competing claims.

 Level 2-B:

 Considerations of equality and reciprocity are coordinated such that choices take into account the claims of various
 persons and the demands of the specific situation. Choices are firm and clear-cut, yet justifications reflect the
 recognition that all persons should be given their due (though, in many situations, this does not mean equal
 treatment).

 TABLE 2

 BRIEF DESCRIPTIONS OF EARLY AUTHORITY LEVELS

 Level 0-A:

 Authority is legitimized by attributes that link the authority figure with the self, either by establishing affec-
 tional bonds between authority figure and self or by establishing identification between authority figure and
 self. The basis for obedience is a primitive association between authority's commands and the self's desires.

 Level 0-B:

 Authority is legitimized by physical attributes of persons, particularly those descriptive of persons in command.
 These legitimizing attributes may be used in a fluctuating manner since they are not linked logically to the func-
 tioning of authority. The subject recognizes the potential conflict between authority's commands and the self's
 wishes: commands are followed as a means of achieving desires or to avoid actions contrary to desires.

 Level 1-A:

 Authority is legitimized by attributes which enable the authority figure to enforce commands (social or physical
 power). Obedience is based upon subject's respect for authority figure's social or physical power, which is
 invested with an aura of omnipotence and omniscience.

 Level 1-B:

 Authority is legitimized by attributes that reflect special talent or ability and that make the authority figure a
 superior person in the eyes of the subject. Obedience is based on reciprocal exchange: one obeys because author-
 ity figure helps, has helped, or otherwise "deserves" your obedience.

 Level 2-A:

 Authority is legitimized by prior training or experience specifically related to the process of commanding. Authority
 figure is seen as able to lead better than subordinates. Obedience is based on subject's respect for this specific
 leadership ability or on the belief that leadership implies a concern for the welfare and the rights of subordinates.

 Level 2-B:

 Authority is legitimized by the coordination of a variety of attributes with specific situational factors. Subject
 believes that a person might possess attributes which enable one to command well in one situation but not in
 another. Authority is seen as a shared, consensual relation between parties, adopted temporarily by one person
 for the welfare of all. Obedience is seen as a cooperative effort which is situation specific rather than a general
 response to a superior person.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 02 Jun 2020 09:10:57 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1012 Child Development

 such as invariance of steplike, forward progres-
 sion. It was surmised that a 1-year time inter-
 val was not long enough to gain a sufficient
 view of social-cognitive development in middle
 childhood.

 cognitive development, some measure of con-
 sistency versus spread in subjects' reasoning is
 required. This was lacking in the previous
 longitudinal study.

 Method

 The present study, a longitudinal follow-
 up of children from the original study de-
 scribed above, had two major purposes. First,
 the study was intended to reveal more accu-
 rately the patterns of social-cognitive change
 (whether steplike or not) through another test-
 ing of children at a further time than had been
 possible in the original study. Second, it was
 hoped that a new look at the entire range of
 subjects' reasoning across their entire protocols
 might reveal relations between the mix of sub-
 jects' reasoning in any given year and the ex-
 tent of their movement in the following year.
 In this manner, a firmer understanding might
 be achieved concerning internal conditions for
 children's social-cognitive change. Finally, a
 third (and minor) goal was to look at individ-
 ual differences between subjects who showed
 different rates of progress (or its lack) in the
 course of the now 2-year study.

 There was also another respect in which
 the prior longitudinal study failed to yield a
 full view on the nature of change in children's
 social reasoning. Scores for children's reasoning
 were limited to single scores representing the
 best level at which each subject performed.
 Although this method of determining subjects'
 scores can facilitate the establishing of empiri-
 cal relations in developmental data, it never-
 theless does not take into account the total pat-
 tern of each subject's reasoning. Most impor-
 tant, it ignores the spread of a child's reason-
 ing across several developmental levels (in in-
 stances in which there is such spread). Accord-
 ingly, single best-level scores are not adequate
 for testing a number of intriguing hypotheses
 concerning the nature of conceptual develop-
 ment. For example, Turiel (1969) once sug-
 gested that considerable "stage mixture" is
 often seen prior to developmental change in
 children's moral judgments. From this sugges-
 tion, we might expect that subjects who dem-
 Subjects.-In the first year of testing
 onstrate marked reasoning "spread" across sev-
 (year 0), the original sample comprised 51
 eral levels on an interview may be in a state
 boys and girls between the ages of 4 and 9.
 of developmental transition. In a later refine-
 These children were drawn from a heteroge-
 ment of this position, Turiel suggested that,
 neous population of middle- and lower-middle-
 more specifically, a transitional state between
 class children in Worcester, Massachusetts. By
 stages is heralded by the subject's initial, ten-
 the final testing (year 2), attrition of one sort
 tative attempts to reason in a manner more ad-
 or another (in particular, moving) had reduced
 vanced than his or her current mode (Turiel
 the sample size to 34 boys and girls, now ages
 1974). This position is similar to a develop-
 6 through 11. Fortunately, the remaining 34
 mental model advanced by Inhelder, Sinclair,
 subjects were fairly evenly distributed across
 and Bovet (1974) to explain the results of their
 the six age levels, with five subjects at the
 logical training studies. From this nrodel, we
 youngest age (now 6 years), six at 7 years, five
 could expect that reasoning spread above, but
 at 8 years, five at 9 years, nine at 10 years, and
 not below, a subject's customary level would
 four at 11 years. This report will mainly con-
 be the best predictor of developmental change.
 sider the progress from year 0 to year 2 of these
 Conversely, Flavell and Wohlwill (1969) have
 34 subjects who remained part of the study
 presented a model in which consolidation of
 from beginning to end. However, the initial
 the previous stage's cognitive processes is seen
 scores of the original 51 will also be examined,
 as a condition for movement to the next stage.
 in order to determine whether the children
 From this model, we might expect very little
 who "dropped out" of the study were different
 spread in a subject's reasoning prior to pro-
 in social reasoning abilities than those who re-
 gressive change between stages. Finally, in a
 mained in the study from year 0 through year
 later statement, Flavell asserted that various
 2.
 cognitive achievements may develop in differ-
 ent ways, some following a pattern of consoli-
 dation-progression, and others following a less
 discrete pattern with gradual change preceded
 by some stage mixture (Flavell 1971, pp. 426-
 428). In order to empirically test the value of
 the above models to describe children's social-

 Procedure.-Subjects were interviewed on

 three main occasions, each approximately 1
 year apart: these shall be referred to as year 0,
 year 1, and year 2. On each main occasion,
 subjects were seen in three or four sessions
 lasting from 20 to 45 min each (depending

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 02 Jun 2020 09:10:57 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 William Damon 1013

 upon the attention span of the subject). Inter-
 views were administered according to the "clin-
 ical method" (Damon 1977; Piaget 1929) in
 which the child is encouraged to fully express
 his ideas on the topic of discussion. For this
 reason, the length of the interview varied from
 child to child, as did the specific wording and
 sequence of some of the questions. There was,
 however, a standard list of questions that all
 children were given an opportunity to answer.
 The main variations among interviews were
 some additional explanations and rephrasings
 of the questions for subjects whose comprehen-
 sion seemed in doubt.

 distribution of the reward. In addition to these
 three target interviews, the year 0 interview
 was repeated in year 1 as a means of control-
 ling for interview-specific differences that might
 have distorted longitudinal results. Since there
 was a high correlation between the repeated
 year 0 interview and the year 1 interview dur-
 ing year 1, r(32) = .86, p < .001, and since
 the two interviews yielded essentially the same
 results in all other respects, the issue of inter-
 view-specific differences was considered moot.

 The interviews were in two main sections,
 a positive-justice component and an authority
 component. The authority component was fur-
 ther subdivided into two parts, a "parental
 authority" interview and a "peer authority" in-
 terview. Because the results of the parental and
 the peer authority interviews were essentially
 the same and in order to save space, this report
 will deal only with the parental part of the
 authority component.' The two main sections
 of the interviews-positive justice and author-
 ity-were always administered in separate test-
 ing sessions, with their order of administration
 changed on each yearly occasion.

 The year 0 positive-justice interviews pre-
 sented the subject with a hypothetical story
 about a classroom of students who had made
 crafts to sell at a school fair. Different children
 in the class had different claims to rewards
 from the sale-one worked hard, one was poor,
 one was well behaved, some were boys, some
 girls, and so on. The subject was asked how
 the proceeds from the sale should be distrib-
 uted and why.2 The year 1 positive-justice in-
 terview centered around a story in which a
 group of children delivered newspapers in or-
 der to earn money. Again, different children
 had different reward claims, and again the sub-
 ject was asked to choose and then to justify
 a fair distribution. The year 2 positive-justice
 interview focused on the story of a teacher
 attempting to decide which students in her
 class deserved some free ice cream, according
 to a number of personal and behavioral criteria
 that distinguished the various children. As in
 the other positive-justice interviews, subjects
 were asked to decide upon and justify a fair

 The year 0 parental authority interview

 was the story of a mother who insisted that her
 child clean his room before going out on a pic-
 nic with friends. Subjects were asked what
 gives mothers the right to command children
 (i.e., what it is about parents that legitimizes
 their authority), whether the child should obey,
 and why (the rationale for obedience). The
 year 1 parental authority interview focused on
 a family traveling together on a camping trip.
 The father leads the way through the woods,
 but his daughter thinks that she knows the way
 better. Subjects were asked how one deter-
 mines the basis for leadership (legitimacy),
 whether the family should obey the father, and
 why. In year 2, the parental authority inter-
 view centered around a mother and father not
 allowing their child to skate on a neighborhood
 ice pond, even though everyone else does, and
 the child thinks that it is safe. Subjects were
 again questioned about the legitimacy of lead-
 ership and the rationale for obedience.

 Interviews from all three testing occasions
 were recorded on tape and scored according to
 positive-justice and authority scoring manuals
 prepared for earlier studies.3 The scoring sys-
 tem calls for a matching of subjects' responses
 against "points" and examples of the points
 given in the scoring manuals. Scores on each
 protocol are then compiled into an overall
 score, the nature of which depends on the pur-
 poses of the investigator. For the current study,
 two scores were retained for each subject. The
 first was an overall score consisting of the per-
 centage of responses scored at each of the six
 reasoning levels. For example, subject 12 on
 year 0 positive justice was scored 0-A (13.5%),
 0-B (53%), 1-A (20%), 1-B (13.5%), denoting
 in this manner the spread of subject 12's rea-
 soning across four positive-justice levels on the

 1 The correlation between peer and parental authority was r(32) = .75, p < .001.
 2 For further detail, see Damon (1977). This and all other interviews and scoring instru-

 ments used in this study are available on request by writing to the author.

 3 Interjudge reliability for both scoring manuals has been previously established (Damon
 1977) and, in the case of the positive-justice instrument, has been widely replicated elsewhere.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 02 Jun 2020 09:10:57 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 TABLE 3

 DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECTS (N = 34) ACROSS PAT-
 TERNS OF CHANGE (or No-Change) IN SUBJECTS'

 SOCIAL REASONING FROM YEAR 0 TO YEAR 2

 N Subjects N Subjects
 Following Following

 Patterns of Pattern Pattern

 Subjects' Modal in in

 Reasoning Scores in Justice Authority
 Year 0/Year 1/Year 2 Reasoning Reasoning

 Patterns with Progressive Changes in Both Years

 Patterns Resulting in Overall Progressive

 Change from Year 0 to Year 2

 1014 Child Development

 first testing occasion. The second score retained
 was the modal reasoning score for each subject
 (in the case of subject 12, 0-B on year 0 posi-
 tive justice). The modal score was intended to
 be an index of a subject's predominant level
 of reasoning on any given testing occasion.
 "Spread above the mode" was calculated by
 totaling the percentage of a subject's reasoning
 at all levels above the modal level (20% +
 13.5%, or 33.5%, for subject 12); "spread below
 the mode" was calculated by adding the per-
 centages of all below-mode reasoning (13.5%
 for subject 12); and "spread away from the
 mode" was calculated by subtracting the sub-
 ject's percentage of reasoning at the mode from
 100% (47% for subject 12).

 Results

 Table 3 shows the individual patterns of

 change in modal scores from year 0 to year 2
 of all 34 subjects on the positive-justice and
 the parental authority interviews, respectively.4
 As can be seen from these figures, the overall
 tendency was for subjects to advance on both
 interviews, although there were a number of
 horizontal movements and even reversals from
 year to year. When the 2 years are taken to-
 gether, however, the vast majority of subjects
 progressed, generally by one or two levels. Ini-
 tial downward movements tended to be cor-
 rected in the following year, as did initial
 movements of particularly great magnitude
 (greater than two levels). Sign tests confirm
 these patterns. From year 0 to year 1 on posi-
 tive justice, 21 subjects changed; of these 21,
 15 moved upward, significant at the p <.05
 level (one-tailed). From year 1 to year 2, 24
 subjects changed, 17 positively, significant at
 p < .05 (one-tailed). But during the whole 2
 years from year 0 to year 2, 22 subjects showed
 change, 19 positively (p < .001). Similarly,
 from year 0 to year 1 on parental authority, 28
 subjects changed, 21 positively, p < .05 (one-
 tailed). From year 1 to year 2, 28 subjects
 changed, 18 positively (nonsignificant). But
 when the movement from year 0 to year 2 was
 considered, 28 subjects showed change, all of
 them positively (p < .001). As can be seen
 from table 3, the main difference between the
 positive-justice and the authority trends was
 the relatively greater incidence of horizontal
 movements from 1 year to the next on the posi-

 0-A/0-B/1-A..........1 0
 0-A/0-B/2-A ......... . 0 1
 0-A/1-A/2-A......... . 1 0
 0-B/1-A/1-B......... 2 1
 0-B/1-A/2-A.......... 0 1
 0-B/2-A/2-B.......... 1 0
 1-A/1-B/2-A......... . 1 1
 1-A/1-B/2-B.......... 1 0
 1-A/2-A/2-B......... . 1 1
 1-B/2-A/2-B. ...... .. 0 1
 1-A/2-B/1-B......... . 0 1

 0-B/1-A/1-A ......... 1i 3
 0-B/0-B/1-B ..........0 1
 0-B/2-B/1-B......... 0 1
 1-A/1-A/1-B......... . 4 1
 1-A/1-B/1-B......... 0 1
 1-A/1-A/2-A ..........0 3
 1-A/2-A/2-A ......... 1 2
 1-A/2-B/2-A......... . 0 4
 1-B/1-B/2-A......... 1 2
 1-B/1-A/2-A.......... 0 2
 1-B/2-B/2-A ......... i1 1
 1-B/1-A/2-B ......... 1i 0
 1-B/1-B/2-B.......... 1 0
 1-B/2-B/2-B......... 1 0

 0-B/1-A/0-B.......... 0 2
 1-A/0-B/1-A ..........0 2
 1-A/1-A/1-A ......... 1 0
 1-A/1-B/1-A.......... 1 0
 1-B/1-A/1-B.......... 2 0
 1-B/1-B/1-B ......... 3 1
 1-B/2-A/1-B ..........2 0
 2-A/0-B/2-A......... 0 1
 2-A/2-A/2-A......... . 2 0
 2-B/2-B/2-B......... 1 0

 0-B/0-B/0-A.......... 1 0
 1-B/1-A/1-A......... 1 0
 2-A/2-A/1-B......... 1 0

 Patterns Resulting in No Overall Change

 from Year 0 to Year 2

 Patterns Resulting in Overall Regressive

 Change from Year 0 to Year 2

 4 There are some minor discrepancies between the year 1/year 0 results reported here and

 the same longitudinal year's results as reported in Damon (1977). These discrepancies are due
 to the current study's use of modal scores rather than best-level scores, as well as to a few addi-
 tional retrievals of year 1 interviews from the original tapes.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 02 Jun 2020 09:10:57 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 tive-justice interview. For the subjects who
 changed, the patterns were similar on the two
 interviews.

 In order to examine the relation between

 subjects' spread of reasoning across various de-
 velopmental levels in 1 year and subjects' prog-
 ress (or its lack) in the following year, a series
 of point-biserial correlations were performed.
 For these analyses, patterns of change from
 year 0 to year 1 were combined with patterns
 of change from year 1 to year 2, thus effec-
 tively doubling the sample size on each of the
 two sets of interviews. (Since this analysis was
 intended to test basic relations between sub-
 jects' reasoning consistency and subsequent
 reasoning development, data could be legiti-
 mately grouped in this way without assuming
 that year 1 to year 2 movement was indepen-
 dent of year 0 to year 1 movement for any
 given subject.) For both justice and authority
 reasoning, the following point-biserial correla-
 tions were performed: (1) Percentage of a
 subject's spread away from the mode x subse-
 quent positive change (scored as 1) or its lack
 (scored as 0) in the subject's modal score; (2)
 spread above the mode x subsequent positive
 change (or its lack) in model score; (3) spread
 below the mode x subsequent positive change
 (or its lack) in modal score. On all analyses,
 subjects who had modal scores of 2-B in the
 first of the two comparison years were elimi-
 nated because of the possibility of ceiling ef-
 fects (2-B being the highest level in the scoring
 system). Also, for the third type of analysis
 noted above, subjects with modal scores of 0-A
 were eliminated because of the possibility of
 floor effects.

 The results of these point-biserial analyses
 were as follows: The correlation between gen-
 eral reasoning spread away from the mode (in
 either direction) and progressive modal change
 in the following year was r(62) - -.04 in the
 case of positive justice, and r (59) = .23 in the
 case of authority. Neither of these associations
 was significant. The correlation between rea-
 soning spread above the mode and progressive
 modal change in the following year was r(62)
 = .43 in the case of justice and r(59) = .44
 in the case of authority. Both of these associ-
 ations were significant at p < .001. The corre-
 lations between reasoning spread below the
 mode and progressive modal change in the fol-
 lowing year was r(59) = -.38 in the case of
 justice, and r(58) - -.20 in the case of au-
 thority, significant at p < .01 in the former case
 and nonsignificant in the latter.

 William Damon 1015

 As can be seen from these results, the best

 predictor of positive movement was reasoning
 spread above the mode in the previous year.
 General spread was no predictor at all on jus-
 tice and was positively but nonsignificantly re-
 lated on authority. Spread below the mode was
 inversely correlated with positive change to a
 significant degree on justice only. With regard
 to this result, it must be remembered that,
 since spread was measured in percentage of
 subjects' reasoning at the various levels, spread
 below the mode was intrinsically related to
 spread above the mode. Thus, this last statistic
 may simply reflect the relation between above-
 mode spread and positive change on justice.
 The opposite could also be argued: that is, that
 the above-mode/ change relation was simply a
 reflection of the below-mode/ change inverse
 relation on justice. However, as can be seen
 from the total pattern of results on both justice
 and authority, below-mode spread was clearly
 not as strong an inverse predictor of change as
 was the above-mode spread a positive predic-
 tor.

 There was also interest in unusual cases-

 that is, subjects who showed no change in the
 2 years and subjects who showed particularly
 great change. (Subjects with negative overall
 change were so rare-three only on positive
 justice, none on parental authority-that it was
 not possible to systematically analyze them.)
 Subjects who showed no change in the 2 years
 were examined for unusual patterns of spread
 and for other distinctive aspects of reasoning.
 No differences were found between these sub-
 jects and other subjects beyond the year-to-
 year relations between spread and progress re-
 ported above. But in the analysis of subjects
 showing large change (two or more levels)
 from year to year, one significant pattern did
 emerge. Subjects who showed inordinately low
 modal scores for their age were the ones par-
 ticularly likely to change positively by more
 than one level the following year. In order to
 make this comparison, subjects with low modal
 scores were defined as those whose age at at-
 taining a given stage was more than 1 SD
 above the mean age of all children attaining
 that stage (considering, in both cases, modal
 scores only). The longitudinal progress of these
 "low-scoring" subjects was compared with that
 of the remaining subjects. Effectively, this
 meant selecting all 0-B subjects 7 years and
 older and 1-A subjects 8 years and older and
 comparing them with the other subjects. (On
 the positive-justice task, mean age for 0-B
 modal reasoning was 5.0, SD 1.7, and mean

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 02 Jun 2020 09:10:57 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1016 Child Development

 age for 1-A was 5.7, SD 1.6; on parental au-
 thority, the 0-B mean age was 5.4, SD 1.2, and
 the 1-A mean age was 5.9, SD 1.5. Mean age
 plus SD for 1-B and above levels were greater
 than 9 years; and there were no 0-A deviations
 above age 5.) On the parental authority inter-
 view, there were 13 0-B's and 1-A's at the
 higher age levels, and 11 of these subjects
 changed positively in the following year by two
 or more levels. A comparison of these subjects
 and the remaining subjects revealed that the
 13 higher-aged subjects at 0-B and 1-A author-
 ity were, to a significant extent, the group par-
 ticularly likely to show positive change by two
 or more levels in the following year (Fisher
 exact test, p <.001, two-tailed). (For this
 analysis, subjects with modal scores of 2-A or
 2-B were eliminated because of possible ceiling
 effects.) On the positive-justice task, the num-
 ber of lower-level, higher-age subjects was not
 sufficient to perform this analysis.

 On any longitudinal study, there is the

 possibility that those subjects who remain in
 the study from beginning to end may differ in
 ability from those subjects who, for one reason
 or another, drop out. In the present study, 17
 of the original 51 subjects dropped out some-
 time after the initial testing. In order to com-
 pare these 17 with the 34 remaining subjects,
 modal reasoning scores for both groups at the
 initial testing were determined, and the mean
 ages at which subjects in each group attained
 stages 0-A, 0-B, 1-A, and 1-B on both positive
 justice and authority were calculated. (None of
 the dropouts was scored higher than modal
 1-B on either positive justice or authority at the
 initial testing.) There were two instances in
 which the dropout group showed a significantly
 higher mean age of attaining a stage than did
 the remaining subjects, and none in which the
 reverse was true. The dropouts reached 1-B on
 positive justice at mean age of 8.3 years, com-
 pared with a 6.5 mean age for the remainers
 (t16 = 2.49, p <.05, one-tailed); and they
 reached 1-A on parental authority at mean age
 of 7.2 years, compared with a 5.9 mean age
 for the remainers (t19 = 1.79, p < .05, one-
 tailed). Other than these two instances, the
 two groups attained most stages at approxi-
 mately identical mean ages, although the small
 numbers of subjects in some cases made the
 comparisons nonmeaningful.

 cial-cognitive development. By the end of year
 2 of the longitudinal study, virtually all chil-
 dren who changed their positive-justice or au-
 thority reasoning did so by advancing along
 the sequence of levels described in tables 1 and
 2. Further, the great majority of changes dur-
 ing the 2 years of the study were limited to
 movements by one or two levels only, a magni-
 tude of change consistent with cross-sectional
 age norms reported for these sequences else-
 where (Damon 1975, 1977). Although there
 were a few subjects on both interviews who
 showed no change from year 0 to year 2, the
 strong tendency was for subjects to move in a
 forward direction. Particularly striking, as wit-
 nessed in table 3, was the tendency for chil-
 dren to progress during 1 year of the study
 if not during both. Lateral or downward move-
 ments seemed to be corrected the following
 year by positive change, as were excessive
 movements forward by subsequent lateral or
 negative change. This evening-out tendency
 was also evident in the finding that children
 who initially performed at low levels for their
 ages were disproportionately likely to advance
 by more than one level in the following year,
 thus catching up with their peers. Explanations
 for the evening-out could range from the possi-
 bility that initial measurement incorrectly as-
 sessed a relatively small number of subjects too
 low or too high to the possibility that children
 with modes of reasoning unusual for their ages
 are particularly susceptible to both short- and
 long-term change through social-cognitive con-
 flict with peers. The latter explanation would
 be consistent with recent experimental work by
 Doise and his colleagues (Doise, Mugny, &
 Perret-Clermont 1975; Mugny & Doise 1978).
 There was also in this study an original

 interest in the reasoning characteristics of chil-
 dren who would show unusually little growth
 during both years of longitudinal testing. We
 were not, however, successful in distinguishing,
 on the basis of any reasoning measure in any
 testing year, such children from the majority
 who showed positive change from year 0 to
 year 2. Part of the difficulty was the relatively
 small sample of children who showed no even-
 tual change, this being a direct result of the
 evening-out tendency noted above. Even rarer
 (limited to only one subject) were cases in
 which there was no eventual change on either
 positive justice or authority. The implication
 here is that, in the present sample, there
 seemed to be few, if any, long-term growth
 problems in subjects' social-cognitive develop-
 ment. For further investigation into this aspect

 Discussion

 The results of this study confirmed the

 progressive, stepwise nature of children's so-

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 02 Jun 2020 09:10:57 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 William Damon 1017

 Earlier in this paper, three hypotheses con-

 of developmental individual differences, it
 seems that special populations beyond normal
 children must be sought.

 of global versus specific stage descriptions is
 an open issue that need not be debated here.
 However, it does seem that different sorts of
 developmental predictions may follow from the
 two types of model. At least within the social-
 cognitive domain, present findings suggest that
 the best predictor of developmental transition
 may be some early reasoning spread in an up-
 ward direction rather than either a generalized
 inconsistency or a highly uniform mode of
 thinking.

 cerning the relation between reasoning consis-
 tency and subsequent development were noted.
 One hypothesis would predict that general
 stage mixture precedes a stage change, another
 that reasoning consolidation and consistency
 precede stage change, and the third that tran-
 sitional reasoning in advance of the predomi-
 nant stage precedes a stage change. For the
 type of stage model employed in this study,
 References
 the findings favor the third of these hypotheses.
 In this sense, the findings of this study support
 the notion that even stagelike development pro-
 ceeds gradually with considerable continuity in
 the child. Stage changes, at least in the social
 concepts investigated here, are anticipated by
 partial, tentative movements present in the
 child's reasoning long before the predominant
 pattern of the child's social understanding be-
 comes reorganized. Although stages of social
 cognition express important qualitative differ-
 development. Cognitive Psychology, 1971, 2,
 ences among various social reasoning patterns
 421-453.
 appearing successively throughout childhood,
 actual day-to-day development is gradual,
 mixed, and often uneven.

 Damon, W. Early conceptions of positive justice as
 related to the development of logical opera-
 tions. Child Development, 1975, 46, 301-312.
 Damon, W. The social world of the child. San

 interaction and the development of cognitive
 operations. European Journal of Social Psy-
 chology, 1975, 5, 367-383.

 Flavell, J. H. Stage-related properties of cognitive

 Doise, W.; Mugny, G.; & Perret-Clermont, A. Social

 Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1977.

 Flavell, J. H., & Wohlwill, J. Formal and functional
 aspects of cognitive development. In D. El-
 kind & J. H. Flavell (Eds.), Studies in cogni-
 tive development. New York: Oxford Univer-
 sity Press, 1969.

 Mugny, G., & Doise, W. Social-cognitive conflict

 It should be noted that these findings are
 not a general test of all conceivable types of
 Inhelder, B.; Sinclair, H.; & Bovet, M. Learning
 stagelike development. In advancing the sec-
 ond of the above hypotheses, for example,
 and the development of cognitive structures.
 Flavell and Wohlwill were discussing transition
 Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
 1974.
 between the very general Piagetian stages of
 concrete and formal operations. In this context,
 consolidation of reasoning refers to the gradual
 elimination of decalages between different con-
 ceptual achievements as the child nears the end
 of the concrete operational period. Simply
 stated, the child becomes able to apply con-
 crete operations to an increasing array of con-
 ceptual tasks, and, as this application nears
 unanimity, the advent of formal operational
 thought is signaled. This highly general, com-
 prehensive use of the stage notion differs from
 the present type of developmental analysis that
 provides stage descriptions of the child's acqui-
 sition of specific concepts.5 The heuristic value

 Turiel, E. Developmental processes in the child's
 moral thinking. In P. H. Mussen, J. Langer, &
 M. Covington (Eds.), Trends and issues in
 developmental psychology. New York: Holt,
 Rinehart & Winston, 1969.

 and structure of individual and collective per-
 formances. European Journal of Social Psy-
 chology, 1978, 8, 181-192.

 moral development. Child Development, 1974,
 45, 14-29.

 Piaget, J. The child's conception of the world. New

 Turiel, E. Conflict and transition in adolescent

 York: Harcourt Brace, 1929.

 5 In addition, the Flavell-Wohlwill model was derived from studies that empirically treated
 developmental phenomena somewhat differently from the present study. The concrete opera-
 tional tasks in the studies cited by Flavell and Wohlwill tested subjects in a pass-fail manner
 for presence or absence of concrete operational reasoning on a series of items. These concrete
 operational tasks were not sensitive to more advanced reasoning, for which, in a pass-fail pro-
 cedure, a different type of task (formal operational) must be used. Accordingly, the Flavell-
 Wohlwill model is appropriate for predicting transition and development within a stage rather
 than from one stage to the next.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 02 Jun 2020 09:10:57 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

