197

British Journal of Developmental Psychology (2004), 22, 197–218
2004 The British Psychological Society

www.bps.org.uk

A lag between understanding false belief and
emotion attribution in young children:
Relationships with linguistic ability and mothers’
mental-state language

Marc de Rosnay1*, Francisco Pons1, Paul L. Harris1 and
Julian M. B. Morrell2
1 Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK
2 University Section of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, Park Hospital for Children,

University of Oxford, UK

This study examines the contribution of children’s linguistic ability and mothers’ use of
mental-state language to young children’s understanding of
false belief and their
subsequent ability to make belief-based emotion attributions. In Experiment 1, children
(N = 51) were given three belief-based emotion-attribution tasks. A standard task in
which the protagonist was a story character and the emotional outcomes were
imagined, and two videos in which the story protagonist was a real
infant and the
emotional outcomes were observable (high and low expressed emotion conditions).
Children’s verbal ability (semantic competence) was also measured. In Experiment 2,
children (N = 75) were given two belief-based emotion tasks: the standard story task
and the high expressed emotion video. In addition, children’s verbal ability (syntactic
competence) and mothers’ use of mental-state attributes when describing their
children were also measured. The results showed that:
(1) the lag between
understanding false belief and emotion attribution was a stable feature of children’s
reasoning across the three tests; and (2) children who were more linguistically
advanced and whose mothers’ described them in more mentalistic terms were more
likely to understand the association between false belief and emotion. The findings
underline the continuing importance of verbal ability and linguistic input for children’s
developing theory-of-mind understanding, even after they display an understanding of
false belief.

Betw e en three
and se ven years of age, c hildren undergo a transitio n in their
understan ding of emo tion. Where as younge r children (3- to 4-year-olds) can make

* Correspondence should be addressed to Dr Marc de Rosnay, Centre for Family Research, Faculty of Social and Political
Sciences, Free School Lane, Cambridge CB2 3RF, UK (e-mail: md364@cam.ac.uk).

198 Marc de Rosnay et al.

accurate emo tion attributions based o n de sires, the y consiste ntly fail to inco rporate
re le vant beliefs in their attributio ns. Consequently, w he n a protagonist’s emo tional
re action depe nds on the re lationship betw een his or her de sire and a falsely he ld belief,
these yo unger children w ill make an incorre ct e motio n attribution. By contrast, older
children (6- to 7-ye ar-o lds) are able to app reciate the ro le o f be lief w he n making
emotio n attributions (Harris, Jo hnson, Hutto n, Andrew s, & Coo ke, 1989). Arguably,
yo unger c hildren’s erro rs are merely a direc t re sult o f the ir failure to understand beliefs
pe r se (Perner, 1991). How ever, the plausible assumption that the c orre ct appraisal o f
belief auto matically and immediate ly e ntails an appro priate emo tion attributio n is no t
necessarily co rre c t. Inde ed, the re are various indications that children acquire an
understanding o f belief before the y use that understanding to make appro priate
emotio n attributio ns (Bartsc h & Wellman, 1995; Bradmetz & Schneider, 1999; Hadw in
& Pe rner, 1991). The
ability
(Ex perime nts 1 and 2) and mo thers’ mental-state language (Ex pe riment 2) influence
children’s ability to make links betw een be lief and e motio n.

study e x amine s

the w ays

curre nt

that

linguistic

Children’s cap acity to make belief-based e motio n attributio ns w as first syste matic ally
docume nte d by Harris e t a l. (1989). The y demo nstrate d that as children move fro m
three to six ye ars o f age, they are incre asingly able to make emo tion attributio ns on the
basis o f belief and, in doing so, jointly c onsider the ro le of beliefs and desires in making
such e motion attributio ns. In the ir paradigm (Ex periment 2), Mickey the Monke y, a
mischievous toy charac ter, playe d tricks o n other animals. During the protagonist’s
absence, Mickey sec retly replaced the de sirable c ontents of a foo d or drink container
w ith an undesirable substitute (or vice ve rsa). Upo n the protago nist’s return, children
w e re asked to predic t his or her e motio n (a) o n first seeing the c ontainer but before
o pening it and (b) after disc ove ring the actual c ontents.

For the crucial ex pe rimental questio n, namely how the pro tagonist w ould feel upon
seeing the container but before ope ning it, Harris e t a l. (1989) found that the majority
o f 4-year-olds failed to apprec iate the pro tagonist’s likely emo tion. Six-year-olds, by
co ntrast, typically made app ropriate e motion attributio ns. Further, 6-year-o lds w e re
o verw helmingly able to give a suitable justification for the e motio n attributio n: They
ex p lained that the emotional outc ome for the protago nist w ould de pend on his o r her
false be lief abo ut the co nte nts of the c ontainer. Ho w eve r, in this e x periment, it w as no t
po ssible to ascertain w hether a c hild might ac know le dge the pro tagonist’s false belief
about the obje ctive contents o f the container but still mistakenly c onclude that the
protagonist’s initial emotio n upo n se eing the co ntainer w ould be dete rmined by its
o bjec tive co ntents rather than its ap pare nt co nte nts. In short, the findings re porte d by
Harris e t a l. (1989) le ft op en the possibility that c hildren’s e motio n attributio ns might
lag behind their belief attributio ns.

Since Harris e t a l. (1989) p ublished their findings, direct ex perime ntal e vidence that
children’s be lief-based emotio n attributio ns do inde ed lag behind their understan ding o f
belief has be come available. In a se ries o f four e x periments, Hadw in and Perner (1991)
co nsiste ntly demonstrated that children co uld app reciate a story character’s mistaken
belief before the y made use of this kno w ledge to make attributions of surprise. In
Ex pe riment 2, for ex ample, 5-year-o lds w ere no mo re likely to make co rre ct belief-base d
judgments of a pro tagonist’s surprise than inco rre c t judgments. Of these same 5-year-
o lds, how eve r, all but one c orre ctly judged the pro tago nist’s false belief. Only by six
years o f age did a significant majority o f children make co rre c t belief-based attributions
o f surp rise. In e x periment 4, a similar lag eme rged for the attribution of hap piness.

These findings have recently be en replicated and ex tended by Bradmetz and

A lag between understanding false belief and emotion attribution

199

Schneider (1999) in a series of five e xp eriments w ith children fro m four to seven years
of age. The patte rn of results w as remarkably similar ac ross all five ex pe riments and
ac ross e motio ns
(fear and happine ss). Forty-eight perc ent (122/254) o f children
ap prec iate d the false be lief held by the pro tagonist but still made the inco rre ct emo tion
attributio n. No children made a co rre c t emo tion attribution but failed the false-belief
te st.

In the first tw o ex perime nts addre ssing children’s understan ding of be lief-based fear,
Bradme tz and Schneider (1999) asked the be lief question (ex perime nt 2: ‘No w , doe s
the goat think the mother w ill come in or doe s he think the w olf w ill come in?’) before
the emo tio n attributio n, in much the same manner as Hadw in and Perner (1991). By
co ntrast, in ex perime nts 3 and 4—addre ssing children’s understanding o f be lief-based
happine ss—Bradmetz and Schneider (1999) varie d the pro cedure in thre e significant
w ays. First,
they asked the child to predict the
pro tagonist’s actio n (i.e., ‘When Max i is in front of the doo r, w he re w ill he loo k for his
choco late ?’). Seco nd, they counterbalanced the order of the false -belief que stio n (actio n
predictio n) and the e motio n-attribution questio n. Finally, in ex pe riment 4, emotio n
attributio ns o f children passing the actio n predictio n w ere c hallenged w ith a co unte r-
argume nt irre spe ctive of w he the r children said ‘happy’ o r ‘sad’.

in place of a be lief questio n,

Despite the se pro cedural variations, the p atte rn of re sults remained stable ; children’s
belief-base d attributions o f emo tion still lagged behind their succ ess o n the false-belief
question (ex perime nts 1 and 2) and the actio n predictio n (e x periments 3–5). Further,
the o verall patte rn of re sults w as not affected by the order o f questio n, and c hildren
w ho se e motio n attributio ns lagged be hind their succ ess o n the action pre dictio n w ere
no t se nsitive to counter-argume nt. Thus, Bradme tz and Schneider (1999) doc ument a
robust lag betw een understanding be lief and e motio n attributio n.

the

linguistic

ro le o f c hildren’s

Given the e x iste nce o f this lag, w e might ask how c hildren come to integrate their
know le dge o f beliefs w ith their understan ding o f e motio n. Rec ently, in the theo ry-of-
mind lite rature ,
ability has assumed inc reasing
importance. There is c onverging e vidence that at least so me aspect o f children’s
verbal ability predic ts succ ess o n theory-of-mind tasks. Bradmetz (1998), for ex ample,
de monstrate d that c hildren’s understan ding o f standard false-belief tasks
is more
stro ngly linked w ith the ir gene ral cognitive abilities—me asured on the Wechsler
Pre scho ol and Primary Sc ale o f Intelligence (WPPSI; Wec hsle r, 1967)—than their age.
Ho w ever, closer inspe ctio n of the WPPSI subtests re vealed that succe ss o n the false-
belief tasks grouped sp ecifically w ith the verbal subte sts.

In a meta-analysis of data co llected o ver a five-year perio d, Happe´

(1995) repo rte d
that higher verbal mental age —me asure d by children’s re cep tive voc abulary o n the
British Picture Voc abulary Scale (BPVS; Dunn, Dunn, Whetto n, & Pintille, 1982)—
predicte d suc cess o n tw o standard false -belief tests for both autistic c hildren (n = 70)
and a co ntro l gro up o f no rmal young children (n = 70). This e ffect w as indepe nde nt o f
chrono logical age. Furthermo re, Jenkins and Astington (1996)
found that gene ral
language ability—measured by c hildren’s syntac tic and se mantic ability in both the
rec eptive and e x pressive domains using the Test o f Early Language De velopment
(TELD; Hre sko, Reid, & Hammill, 1981)—and ve rbal me mory p redicted performance o n
four standard false-belief tests inde pendent of age. In bo th these studies, a linguistic
threshold e merged, below w hich no c hildren p assed the false -belief te sts, but this alone
did no t ex plain the relationship betw een linguistic ability and false-belief understanding
in either study.

The ex istence of a lag betw een unde rstanding belief and belief-base d e motio n

200 Marc de Rosnay et al.

established relationship be tw ee n childre n’s
attributio n in co njunction w ith the
linguistic ability and false-belief unde rstanding raises the po ssibility that individual
differences in linguistic ability might also be re late d to the more de manding te sts o f
belief-based emotion. Although this question has no t been addressed dire ctly in the
literature, Cutting and Dunn (1999) have pro vided stro ng evidence that language ability
is indep endently related to bo th false-belief understan ding and emo tional p ersp ective-
taking. In a large study (N = 128) o f children’s social co gnition, Cutting and Dunn
(1999) found that language ability measured using the BPVS and the Bus Story Te st
(Renfre w , 1991) w as stro ngly co rre lated w ith a co mpo site measure o f seven standard
false -belief te sts and an affec tive pe rspe ctive -taking task (De nham, 1986). In this latte r
task, children had to judge ho w a puppe t w o uld feel in 16 situations p rovoking
happiness, sadne ss, anger, and fear. The c ombine d language measure w as a significant
indepe nde nt p redic tor o f both false-belief unde rstanding—onc e the variance assoc iate d
w ith age, family background, and emotio n understan ding had been acc ounted for—and
emotio nal pe rspe ctive -taking—o nce the variance associate d w ith age,
family bac k-
gro und, and false belief had been ac counted for.

In the first e x periment, the refore , w e e x amine w hether individual differences in
children’s verbal mental age c ontributes to their capacity to make links be tw e en false-
belief understanding and co rre c t belief-based emo tio n attributio n. To c larify the
re latio nship betw ee n linguistic ability and be lief-based e motio n attribution, w e se t up
tw o co mpeting hypo the se s. Our first hypothesis w as that any ap pare nt relationship
betw ee n verbal mental age and belief-base d emo tion attributio n w ould be ex plained by
the unde rlying relationship betw een ve rbal mental age and false -belief understanding.
That is, linguistic ability w ould not c ontribute to children’s unde rstanding of be lief-
based emotion but w ould o nly c ontribute to understan ding of the false belief. The
seco nd and c omp eting hypothesis state d that c hildren passing mo re o f the belief-base d
emotio n attributio ns w ould have a higher verbal mental age w hen comp are d w ith tho se
o nly p assing the false-belief questio ns. That is, linguistic ability w o uld co ntribute to
bo th false -belief unde rstan ding and indep endently to belief-based emo tion attribution.
Ho w ever, before evaluating these hypo these s, it w as app ropriate to co nfirm that the
lag betw een false-be lief understanding and be lief-base d emo tion attribution c ould be
re plicate d unde r various conditions. Thus, thre e different tasks w ere used to assess
children’s understanding o f belief-based e motio n. The first task, the Do g–Rabbit Te st,
w as a sto ry acted o ut w ith to y animals and pro ps, and w as closely base d on the
paradigm devised by Harris e t a l. (1989) and employe d by Hadw in and Pe rne r (1991).
The seco nd and third tasks, tw o versions of the Mo the r–Infant Separation Test (de
Rosnay & Harris, 2002), w e re videos in w hic h the protagonist w as a real infant w ho se
emotio nal reactio ns w e re directly observable. The MIST sto ry centre d o n the infant’s
ex p ectatio n that his or he r mother—w ho had rece ntly left the ro om—w as re turning.
How e ver, in p lace of the mother, a stran ger appeared. These tw o video s varied only in
the e motio nal re spo nse s of the infant. In the low ex pressed emo tion ve rsion (LEE) o f
the MIST, the infant w as c omparatively relax ed; she did not display any clear signs o f
distre ss. In the high e x pressed emotion versio n (HEE), the infant w as very distressed at
the departure of his mother and at the app earanc e o f the stranger.

Traditional asse ssments o f c hildren’s understanding o f belief-based e motio n, such as
the Do g–Rabbit Test, do not give c hildren any direct informatio n about the emo tional
re spo nse s o f the p rotagonist; these must be imagined by the child. By co ntrast, in an
ec ologically valid setting, children can some times observe the p rotagonist’s emo tional
re spo nse dire ctly. Therefore, in designing the MIST, w e included a c omp arative ly

A lag between understanding false belief and emotion attribution

201

ne utral or ambiguo us emotional re spo nse from the protago nist—intended to mirro r
traditional assessments o f belief-base d e motio n in w hich the re are no emo tional
displays (i.e., the LEE). We also included an emotionally unambiguous re spo nse to
reflect alternative circ umstanc es in w hich there is a clear emo tional response by the
pro tagonist (i.e., the HEE).

For all three tasks, c hildren w ere first asked to say how the p rotagonist fe lt and to
justify their respo nse. Having made an emo tion attribution (predictio n and justifica-
tion), they w e re then asked e x plicitly abo ut the pro tago nist’s (false) belief. By asking
the false-be lief que stio n afte r the emo tion attribution, children’s emotio n pre dictio ns
and their spo ntane ous justifications co uld be conside red before their atte ntion w as
draw n to the pro tago nist’s be lief by ex p licit questio ning. In acc ordance w ith p revious
findings, w e predic ted that,

(1) Childre n making c orre ct e mo tio n pre dic tio ns w o uld be mo re

likely to
spontaneo usly justify tho se p redic tions in terms of the pro tagonist’s false be lief
o r
restricted kno w ledge. By co ntrast, children making inco rre c t emotio n
p redictions w o uld be more likely to refer to the objective reality or give so me
o ther unsuitable justificatio n. This w ould re present a partial rep licatio n of Harris
e t a l. (1989).

(2) Among children making inco rre c t emo tion attributions, some w o uld still make
an ac curate appraisal of the pro tagonist’s false be lief. The re verse patte rn,
c hildren making a co rre ct e motio n attributio n but an inc orre ct appraisal o f the
p rotagonist’s false belief, w as c onside red unlikely, although logically po ssible.
This w ould re present a replication of the lag demonstrated by Bradmetz and
Sc hne ider (1999) and Hadw in and Pe rner (1991).

Follow ing on the se pre dictio ns, w e aimed to te st the tw o co mpeting hypo the ses
articulated above co ncerning the co ntributio n of verbal ability to children’s capacity to
make links betw een belief and emotion. Namely, (i) verbal ability is linked o nly to the
underlying unde rstanding false belief, and (ii) verbal ability is linke d to both false-belief
understan ding and c orre ct be lief-based emo tio nal attribution.

EXPERIMENT 1

Method
Participants
Partic ipants w ere 51 c hildren (25 boys; 26 girls) be tw e en 3 years 7 months and 6 years
4 mo nths (M = 60.90 mo nths; SD = 7.8 months) w ith English as their first language. All
the children came from nurse rie s and primary scho ols in Ox ford w hich draw c hildren
from a mixture o f middle, low e r-middle , and w o rking-c lass families.

Procedure
Children w ere individually teste d at tw o sessions spaced o ne w e ek ap art. At Session 1,
children w e re first given the Do g–Rabbit Te st, a simplified ve rsion o f ex perime nt 2
from Harris e t a l. (1989). The Dog–Rabbit Test w as given first bec ause the pilot study
reveale d that children p artic ularly enjoyed it. This allow ed the princ ipal researche r to

202 Marc de Rosnay et al.

build a good rappo rt w ith the c hildren and fac ilitate d the rest of the te sting. In the Do g–
Rabbit Test, Gro mit the Do g p lays a trick on Roge r the Rabbit w hile he is out on a w alk.
Gro mit secre tly replaces Roger’s
favo urite food, name ly Smartie s w ith peanuts.
Children w ere told emphatic ally that Smarties w ere Roger’s favourite foo d. To be sure
that children understo od the sto ry details, tw o memo ry questions w ere asked, assessing
w hether c hildren reme mbered (1) Roger’s favo urite foo d and (2) the true co ntent of the
bo x.

Follow ing Harris e t a l. (1989), the e motio n predictio n questio n w as aske d after the
co ntro l questions (‘Ho w does Roge r fe el w hen he first loo ks at the box o n the table,
before he e ats so me food fro m it? (Pause.) Do es he fe el hap py or sad?’). Give n that
Roge r mistakenly thinks that the box co ntains Smarties, the c orre ct answ er to this
question is ‘happy’. All children w e re also aske d to justify the ir predictions (‘Yes, and
w hy doe s Roger fe el happ y/sad?’). Follow ing their justifications, c hildren w ho did not
ex p licitly refe r to Roger’s false belief w ere given a seco nd o ppo rtunity to demo nstrate
that the y appreciated it. Thus, c hildren w ere asked, ‘What does Roger think is in the
bo x?’

Also at Session 1, after the Dog–Rabbit Test, children w atc he d (on video ) o ne version
o f the Mother–Infant Se paratio n Test (MIST; de Rosnay & Harris, 2002). At Session 2,
children w atched the o ther ve rsion of the MIST. Pre sentation order w as syste matically
co unterbalanced across children. The MIST video s depict a re al mo ther and her infant
in the w aiting room of a doc tor’s (or dentist’s) surgery. The mother goes thro ugh the
doo r to see the doctor (o r dentist), and the infant is left w aiting in the w aiting ro om.
Having been left alone , the infant hears a kno ck at the doo r and has re ason to believe it
is his (or her) returning mother (fa lse b e lie f), but the ope ning doo r actually reveals a
stranger. At the e nd of the video—onc e the stranger has appeared—c hildren w ere
asked how the infant fe lt w hen he or she heard the kno ck at the door but be fore the
doo r opened. To be sure that children understo od the sto ry details, tw o me mory
questions w ere aske d, assessing w hether children: (1) remembere d w here the mother
had gone and (2) unde rsto od that it w as actually a stran ge r behind the door (and not the
mo the r).

The tw o ve rsions o f the MIST w ere selec ted to depic t different and realistic infant
re actions to the departure of the mo the r toge the r w ith the infants’ p ositive ex pe ctatio n
that the mother is returning. In the low ex presse d emo tio n version (LEE), the infant w as
co mparatively relax ed w hen the mother left. Her reactio ns inc luded babbling, playing,
and ex p loratio n. How e ver, upo n hearing the kno ck at the doo r, she sto ppe d w hat she
w as do ing and atte nded to the door. Whe n the
infant
acknow ledged he r entry but continue d to play and show ed no audible signs of
distre ss. In the high e x pressed emo tion version (HEE), the infant w as audibly and visibly
upset at the mo the r’s departure . His reac tions include d fussing, crying, and moving
tow ards the door from w hich his mother departe d. How e ver, upo n he aring the knoc k
at the doo r, his c rying and fussing ce ase d, and he again move d closer to the op ening
doo r. Only onc e the stran ge r appe are d in the place o f the ex p ected mother and
atte mpte d to pick him up did he be gin to cry again.

stranger came

in,

the

The tw o video s of the MIST w e re reco rded so as to fac ilitate overall comprehe nsio n
o f the sto ry. Thus, the frame sho w ed the infant, the w aiting roo m, the door, and the
stranger’s entrance in full. For this re ason, the infants’ face s w ere too small for facial
ex p ressions to be pro perly disc erned. Furthermo re, upon hearing the knoc k at the
doo r, both infants w ere o rie nte d to w ards the door, and their faces w ere o nly partially
visible in pro file. Neverthe le ss, the infants’ mo veme nts, voc alizations, and o ve rall moo d

A lag between understanding false belief and emotion attribution

203

w ere readily o bservable. The video s also include d rec orded narrative s giving the sto ry
de tails. Finally, as children w atc he d, each video w as pause d for impo rtant sto ry eve nts
(e.g. the departure of the mo the r and the kno ck at the door), and the e x perime nter
reite rate d the ove rall situatio n so that the c hild fully understo o d the unfolding sto ry.
The e motio n pre dictio n question for the LEE and the HEE w as as follow s; ‘Whe n
Sally (To m) is alone , she (he) he ars so meo ne knocking at the doo r. Ho w does Sally
(To m) feel be fore she (he) see s w ho it is? (Pause .) Does she (he) fee l happ y or sad?’ As
for the Do g–Rabbit test, children w ere also asked to justify the ir e motio n predictions
(‘Yes, and w hy does she (he ) feel happy/sad’). Unless c hildren referre d ex plicitly to the
pro tagonist’s belief in the ir justificatio n, the y w ere also asked the follow -up false-belief
question, ‘Who does Sally (Tom) think is behind the doo r?’ The full sto ry narrative can
be found in de Rosnay and Harris (2002).

Also at Session 2, afte r the se cond ve rsion o f the MIST, children w e re given the long

version of the BPVS (Dunn e t a l., 1982).

Results
The results are re porte d in thre e parts. First, w e p rese nt the relationship betw een
children’s emotio n p redictions and the ir justificatio ns. Seco nd, w e c ompare children’s
emo tion attributio ns w ith the ir false-be lief unde rstanding. Finally, w e conside r the
asso ciation betw ee n ve rbal mental age, emotion attribution, and false-belief under-
standing, and w e evaluate w hether verbal mental age is re late d to the lag be tw e en false-
belief understanding and belief-based emo tion attribution.

lapse s

Children’s emotion predictions and justifications
All children passed the contro l questions for the Dog–Rabbit te st and bo th versions o f
the MIST, although some times de tails had to be repe ate d be cause o f
in
co nce ntratio n o r interruption. Children mo st c ommo nly made a co rre ct emotio n
predictio n (‘happy’) for the LEE (31/51), follow ed by the HEE (19/51) and the Dog–
Rabbit Te st (17/51). Of the children making corre ct emo tion pre dictio ns, ap prox i-
mately three -quarte rs justified their pre dictio n app ropriate ly for the Do g–Rabbit Test
(13/17), the LEE (23/31), and the HEE (14/19). Appro priate justificatio ns w ere those in
w hic h children re ferre d to the pro tagonist’s false belief e x plicitly (e.g., ‘because he
thinks there are Smarties in the re’, ‘co s he [To m] thinks it is his mummy’), the apparent
or ex pe cte d outc ome (e.g., ‘co s it might be his [Tom’s] mummy’), or the protagonist’s
restricted know le dge (e .g., ‘he [Ro ge r] doesn’t know he [Gro mit] to ok ’e m’). The
remaining children w ho made corre ct emo tion predictio ns foc used on some o the r
aspec t o f the situatio n and the reby failed to make any reference to the pro tagonist’s
false be lief, mistaken e x pectation, o r restricted kno w ledge .

In ge ne ral, c hildre n failing the

e mo tio n pre dic tio n que stio n de sc ribe d the
pro tagonist as sad. A small numbe r of children gave so me other desc riptio n o f the
pro tagonist’s emo tion for both the HEE (e.g., ‘ho rrible’, ‘crying’) and the LEE (e.g.,
‘o kay’). Only one o f the children failing the e motio n pre dictio n questio n pro vided a
justificatio n in terms of the p rotagonist’s false belief. The remaining children justified
their predictio ns in terms o f the o bjective situation o r o utco me (e.g., ‘peanuts are inside
the box ’, ‘bec ause his [To m’s] mummy le ft him’) and a small number of children did no t
pro vide a justificatio n.

204 Marc de Rosnay et al.

Follow ing Harris e t a l. (1989), justifications w ere c lassified as corre ct o r inco rre c t/
uninformative , depending o n w he the r or not c hildren made an ap prop riate refere nce to
the protago nist’s false be lief, mistake n ex pec tation, or restric te d know ledge. Emotio n
justificatio ns w e re transcribe d and sco red by the principal re searcher and a seco nd,
indepe nde nt, rate r w ho w as blind to the emo tion pre dictio n. The inter-rater agre ement
w as 100%for all three tasks. Table 1 pre sents children c lassified by the to tal number o f
co rre c t predictions and justific ations they made.

Table 1. Contingency between correct emotion predictions and justifications for the Dog–Rabbit test,
the HEE and the LEE (N = 51)

Correct predictions

None

None
1
2
3

18
4
3
1

Correct justifications

1

–
8
2
–

2

–
–
3
2

3

–
–
–
10

This

table sho w s

that children predominantly gave equal numbers o f corre ct
emotio n predic tions and justifications; the re w as a stro ng po sitive relationship betw ee n
-b = .77; p < .001). A small number of children made
these tw o resp onses (Ke ndall
mo re co rre ct p redic tions than justificatio ns. These results c onc ord w ith tho se o f Harris
e t a l. (1989).

Emotion attribution and false-belief understanding
Re call that c hildren w ho failed to make an e x plicit re ference to the protagonist’s false
belief in the ir justification w ere asked abo ut that be lief in a follow -up questio n. Children
w ho did make ex plicit reference to the protago nist’s false belief w e re tre ated as passing
the false-belief que stio n. Ne verthele ss, the y w e re also asked a co nfirmatory questio n,
w hich the y alw ays answ e red c orre c tly (e.g. ‘So he thinks there are Smarties in the box
does he?’). Table 2 presents children’s resp onses to the e motio n predictio n questio n,
the emo tion p rediction que stio n + justific atio n, and the false-belief que stio n for the
Dog–Rabbit Te st, the LEE and HEE. For all three tasks, a relatively large number of
children made an incorre ct emo tion predictio n but w ent o n to pass the false-be lief
question, w here as only a very small number of children made a corre ct emotion
pre diction and w ent o n to fail the false -belief que stio n. Mc Ne mar Te sts co nfirme d
significance of this asymme trical patte rn for the Dog–Rabbit Te st (p < .001) and the
HEE (p < .001). The re lationship w as marginally significant for the LEE (p = .065). No
children made a co rre ct emotio n p rediction + justific atio n and failed the false-belief
question.

Table 2 also show s that a small number of c hildren made a co rre ct emotion
pre dictio n (‘happy’) but failed the false-belief test for e ac h task. None of these children
had pre viously offered a satisfactory emo tion justificatio n. By co ntrast, the great
majority of children making a co rre c t emo tion predic tion and passing the false-belief
question also gave a suitable e motio n justificatio n.

A lag between understanding false belief and emotion attribution

205

Table 2. Children’s responses on the emotion prediction, emotion prediction + justification (in
parentheses), and false-belief questions for the three belief-based emotion attribution tasks (Dog–
Rabbit test, LEE and HEE; N = 51)

Emotion prediction

False belief

Dog–Rabbit

LEE

HEE

(correct prediction and justification)

Sad/other (Fail)

Happy (Pass)

Fail
Pass
Fail
Pass

17 (18)
17 (20)
1 (–)
16 (13)

11 (13)
9 (15)
2 (–)
29 (23)

13 (15)
19 (22)
2 (–)
17 (14)

To be co nfident that c hildren pro perly unde rsto od the assoc iatio n be tw ee n be lief
and be lief-base d e motio n, w e o nly co nsidered tho se c hildren making a corre ct emo tio n
predictio n and justific atio n to have passed the e motio n attribution. Ex amination o f
performance on all three tasks re veale d that c hildren performe d co nsistently o n such
emo tion attributio ns (Cronbach
= .86). De spite such co nsistency, ho w eve r, children mo re o ften made a co rre c t
emo tion attribution for the LEE than the HEE; this result w as unex pe cte d.

= .81) and o n the false-belief questions (Cro nbac h

To assess the significance of this p atte rn, w e co mpared the prop ortio n of c hildren
passing the emo tion attribution for the LEE and the HEE using a test of tw o bino mial
pro portions. The advantage on the LEE w as marginally significant (z = 1.89; p = .059).
By co ntrast, there w as no difference in the prop ortio n o f children passing the false-
belief question for the LEE and the HEE (z =
.48; n s ). By implication, the visible
absenc e of any negative emo tion in the LEE made it easier to identify the pro tagonist’s
emo tion but not her false be lief. Table 2 also sho w s that children’s performanc e on the
Do g–Rabbit Test and the HEE w as very similar. Ho w ever, the se tasks co uld no t be
co mpare d directly as they w ere no t c ounterbalanced.

In sum, a lag betw een understanding be lief and emotion attributio n w as e vident for
all three tasks, and children performe d w ith a high de gree o f c onsiste ncy acro ss tasks.
For this re ason, w e co mbined the thre e tasks to create co ntinuous me asures (0–3) for
false-be lief understanding (FB) and e motio n attributio n (EA).

Verbal mental age, belief-based emotion attribution, and false-belief understanding
Table 3 gives the Pearso n pro duc t moment c orre latio ns be tw e en false belief (FB), belief-
based emo tion attributio n (EA), sex , age , and verbal me ntal age. The me an ve rbal
mental age score on the BPVS w as 57 months (SD = 12.5), and the distributio n w as
ap prox imate ly no rmal. (The mean standardized sco re w as 96.9; SD = 10.45.) Gender
w as included in the corre lation analysis bec ause the re is some e vidence that girls
pe rfo rm be tte r o n e motion understanding tasks, altho ugh this e vidence
is not
co nsistent (e.g. Dunn e t a l., 1991b; Hughes & Dunn, 1998). From Table 3, it is clear
that verbal mental age is significantly associated w ith both FB and EA. How eve r, given
the po sitive corre lation of these fac tors w ith age , it w as important to establish w hether
these relationships remained w hen the effec ts of age w ere co ntro lled for. In the low e r
half of Table 3, it can be seen that a stro ng positive asso ciation betw ee n verbal me ntal
age and both FB and EA remained, e ven w he n the effect o f age w as acco unte d for.
Ho w ever, the re lationship betw een age and both FB and EA did no t remain w hen the

206 Marc de Rosnay et al.

Table 3. Pearson correlation coefficients for false belief (FB), belief-based emotion attribution (EA),
sex, age, and verbal mental age, and partial correlations controlling for age and verbal mental age
(N = 51)

3. Sex

4. Age

5. VMA

Variable

1. False belief (FB)
2. Emotion attribution (EA)
3. Sex
4. Age
5. Verbal mental age (VMA)

1. FB

–

2. EA

.59**

–

.12
.05
–

<Partial correlation coefficients controlling for age>

1. False belief (FB)
2. Emotion attribution (EA)
3. Sex

–

.53**

–

.18
.00
–

1. False belief (FB)
2. Emotion attribution (EA)
3. Sex

<Partial correlation coefficients controlling for verbal mental age>
.03
.03
.19

.11
.11
–

–

.24
–

.35*
.36*
.14
–

–
–
–

.68**
.68**
.05
.50**
–

.62**
.62**
.14

–
–
–

*p < .05; ** p < .01.

effect of ve rbal mental age had been ac co unted for. The re w ere no effects for gender,
w hich w as drop ped fro m furthe r analysis.

To assess the co ntributio n of verbal mental age to FB and EA, a cumulative logit
mo de l for o rdinal re spo nses w as used (Agresti, 1996; Bender & Bender, 2000). The final
mo de l produces a single, ho mogeneo us, odds ratio o ver all cut-off po ints summarizing
the e ffect o f an ex planatory variable(s) (X) on the response variable (Y). This pro cedure
assumes that a resp onse variable w ith k + 1 o rde red categories pro duce s k c ontinuous
and parallel linear models. For the o verall mode l to be ade quate , therefore , the ‘equal
slopes assumptio n’ must first be met. This assumption w as me t (the Pro portional Odds
Assumptio n w as not violate d) for all three analyse s. The LOGISTIC proce dure in SAS
using a forw ard selec tion c riterio n w as used to evaluate the e ffect o f the ex planatory
variable s o n FB and EA.

In the first model, the c ontribution of age and ve rbal mental age to FB w as asse sse d.
Only ve rbal mental age had a significant impac t o n FB. For e very 3-month increme nt in
ve rbal mental age, children w ere 1.7 times mo re likely to p ass an additional FB que stio n
(95% CI 1.6–1.9; p < .001). In the sec ond regre ssio n mo de l, the c ontribution of age and
ve rbal mental age to EA w as assessed. Again, o nly verbal mental age had a significant
impact on EA. For eve ry 3-month incre ment in ve rbal me ntal age , children w ere 1.6
time s mo re likely to pass an additional emo tio n attributio n (95% CI 1.5–1.7, p < .001).
Neve rtheless, the possibility remained that the apparent relationship betw ee n ve rbal
me ntal age and EA (regression 2) w as due to the underlying relationship be tw e en verbal
me ntal age and FB (regression 1). Thus, to be sure that ve rbal mental age made a truly
indepe nde nt co ntributio n to EA, a third regression w as carried o ut in w hich the
association betw een FB and EA w as acc ounted for before the effec ts o f age and verbal
me ntal age to EA w ere c onside red. In this final regression, FB w as again stro ngly re late d
to EA. For each additional false-belief question answ e red co rre c tly, children w ere 5.2
time s mo re likely to pass an additional emo tio n attributio n (95% CI 1.7–33.0; p < .05).
Again, age w as dro pped from the model, but ve rbal me ntal age still had a significant

A lag between understanding false belief and emotion attribution

207

impact o n EA o ver and above the contribution of FB. For every 3-mo nth inc rement in
verbal mental age , children w e re 1.4 times more likely to pass an additional emo tion
attributio n (95% CI 1.3–1.5, p < .01). Thus, verbal mental age w as stro ngly re late d to
both FB and EA.

Discussion
Ex perime nt 1 first e x amine d children’s belief-based emotion attributions and the lag
betw een suc cessful emotion attribution and unde rstanding false belief. It w as found
that children w ho make a c orre ct emo tion predictio n are ove rw he lmingly able to justify
their pre dictio n c orre ctly o n the basis of the pro tagonist’s false belief, re stric ted
know le dge, or e xp ectatio n. This
(1989).
Ex perime nt 1 also reve aled that a large pro portion of c hildren co rre c tly judged the
pro tagonist’s false belief but failed the emo tion prediction for all three tasks. The
reverse patte rn, c hildren passing the emo tion prediction but failing the false-belief
question, w as rare . This difference w as significant for a traditional co gnitive emo tion
task invo lving a sto ry ac ted out w ith to y animals and pro ps (Harris e t a l., 1989) and for
videos in w hic h the pro tagonist w as a real infant, and the emo tional outcome s w ere
dire ctly obse rvable . Therefore , w e replicate d the lag first de monstrate d by Hadw in and
Perner (1991) unde r various c onditions.

finding replicates

that o f Harris

e t a l.

The re w as, ho w e ve r, a disc re p ancy be tw e e n c hildre n’s

suc c e ssful e mo tio n
attributio n o n the LEE and the HEE. A plausible e x planatio n for this disc repanc y is
that the visible abse nce of any negative emotio n in the LEE facilitated the co rre c t
attributio n of a po sitive e motio n (i.e., happ iness at the mo ther’s e x pected re turn).
Ne ve rthe less,
re sults o f Ex pe rime nt 1 suggeste d that c hildre n p e rfo rme d
co nsistently o n the Do g–Rabbit Test and the HEE (se e Table 2), desp ite the fact that
there w ere no visible o r audible emo tio nal cues in the forme r. Therefore , in Ex pe riment
2 w e co mpare the Dog–Rabbit Test and the HEE dire ctly using a co unterbalance d
de sign.

the

Ex aminatio n o f individual differenc es in ve rbal me ntal age (BPVS) co nfirmed that a
higher verbal mental age w as asso ciated w ith c orre ct answ ers on the false-belief
questions. This po sitive relationship w as inde pendent of age. This re sult replicates
those of Happe´ (1995) and Jenkins and Astington (1996), and reinforce s the impo rtance
of language ability for children’s false -belief understanding. It w as also found that
children w ith a higher verbal mental age passe d more belief-based emo tion attributio ns
(regression 2). Mo reo ver, the relationship betw ee n verbal mental age and false be lief
did not fully ex plain this latter association (regression 3). Thus, as w ith Cutting and
Dunn (1999), w e found that verbal mental age makes a significant contribution to
children’s emotion understanding. In sum, the lag betw een understanding false be lief
and belief-based e motion attributio n is asso ciated w ith individual differences in verbal
ability, eve n among c hildren w ho de monstrate a firm unde rstan ding o f false belief

EXPERIMENT 2
In Ex pe riment 2, w e further e x amine d ho w individual differenc es in linguistic ability
and, additionally, linguistic inp ut contribute to c hildren’s ability to make links betw een
belief and emo tio n. Although the BPVS has reliably bee n show n to pre dict false-belief

208 Marc de Rosnay et al.

To addre ss

syntac tic

false-be lief unde rstanding o f

it o nly assesses c hildren’s
understanding (Cutting & Dunn, 1999; Happe´ , 1995),
re ceptive vo cabulary, and it is not immediate ly cle ar how this particular asp ect of
language is asso ciated w ith false -belief unde rstanding and emo tion attribution. For this
re ason, vario us researc he rs have stre ssed the nee d for mo re directed hypothese s abo ut
the relationship be tw ee n language ability and false-be lief understanding (se e,
for
ex ample, de Villiers, 2000; Jenkins & Astington, 1996)
this que stio n, Astingto n and Jenkins

(1999) ex amined the relative
c o ntributio n to c hildre n’s
and se mantic
co mpe tence in both the e x pressive and re cep tive domains (using the TELD). As
defined, syntactic c ompe tence reflec ted children’s understanding o f ho w the various
parts o f the sentenc e relate to one ano the r. Semantic compete nce c onc erne d children’s
understanding o f w ord meaning. Children w e re teste d for their the ory-o f-mind abilities
(using tw o standard false-be lief tasks and an appe aranc e–re ality task) and language
abilities at appro x imately 3.5-mo nth intervals. The mean age at Time 1 w as 40.1 mo nths
and 47.1 at Time 3. Astingto n and Je nkins (1999) found that language at an e arlier time
predicted later theory-o f-mind abilities, but the reve rse patte rn did not hold. Further
analysis confirmed that de spite the stro ng co rre lation be tw e en syntac tic and se mantic
c o mp ete nc e , only c hildre n’s
inde pe nde nt
co ntribution to theory-o f-mind abilities. There w as no differenc e for the re ceptive
and ex pressive domains.

a significant

syntac tic

abilities made

The impo rtance o f syntactic comp ete nce has also be en demo nstrate d for children’s
emotio n understanding. Using the Test for the Recep tion of Grammar (TROG; Bishop,
1989)—w hic h tests c hildren’s understanding of 20 syntactic c ontrasts in the re ceptive
domain—Po ns, Law son, Harris, and de Rosnay (2003)
found that language ability
indepe nde ntly ex plained 27% of the varianc e in children’s emo tion understan ding
betw ee n the age s of four and 11 years. Emo tion unde rstanding w as assessed using a
picture bo ok test, the Test o f Emo tion Co mpre hensio n (TEC; Po ns e t a l., 2003), w hic h
me asures nine separate components of e motio n. Together w ith age, language ability
ex p lained 72%of the overall variance in emotio n understanding. Thus, in Ex perime nt 2,
w e asked w he the r children’s syntac tic abilities p redicted false belief and e motio n
understanding.

In addition to c hildren’s linguistic abilities, other authors have po inted to the
impo rtance of early linguistic input both in the family c ontex t (Dunn, Bro w n, &
Be ardsall, 1991a; Dunn e t a l., 1991b) and fro m the mo the r spe cifically (Meins &
Fernyhough, 1998; Me ins, Fe rnyho ugh, Russe ll, & Clark-Carte r, 1998) for c hildren’s
early so cial co gnitions and theo ry-of-mind abilities. Dunn e t a l. (1991b) obse rved
children in the ho me w ith both their mo the rs and siblings at 33 months. Include d in the
initial measures w as the percentage o f fee ling state and c ausal talk from a sample o f
normal co nversatio n. Co rre lational analyses sho w ed that mo ther-to -c hild feeling-state
talk w as
false -belief
understanding. These results suggest that the linguistic input from the mother may
be an important source of informatio n for children’s developing soc ial c ognitions (as
me asured by false -belief ex planations and affective pe rspe ctive-taking).

relate d to children’s e mo tio n unde rstanding and to the ir

Me ins

(1998) also e mphasizes

the importanc e of mate rnal disc ourse (and the
attitudes underpinning it) for bo th the developme nt of the mo the r–c hild attac hme nt
re latio nship (Ainsw orth, Blehar, Wate rs, & Wall, 1978) and later theory-o f-mind abilities
in the child. Her c onc ept of m in d -m in d e d n e s s reflects a manne r o f c ommunic atio n
betw ee n mother and child that fosters both psycho logical unde rstanding in the child
and secure attachme nt. She de fine s mind-mindedness as ‘[t]he prop ensity to tre at o ne’s

A lag between understanding false belief and emotion attribution

209

infant as an individual w ith a mind, rathe r than merely a cre ature w ith ne eds w hic h
must be fulfilled’ (Meins e t a l., 1998, p. 240). To measure mind-mindedne ss, Me ins e t a l.
(1998) asked mothers to desc ribe their child; this measure w as no t co ntinge nt o n the
co nve rsational interactio ns be tw e en the mo the r and child. Maternal descriptio ns w ere
then score d for the use o f mental, be havioural, and physical attributes. Mothers o f
se curely attac hed infants, at approx imate ly one year, w ere mo re likely to de scribe their
children in mentalistic terms at three years of age. In addition, Me ins et al. (1998) found
that mo thers’ use of mental-state attribute s (in conjunc tion w ith the child’s attac hme nt
and mate rnal sensitivity) predicted children’s false-be lief understanding at four ye ars of
age, and be lief-based emo tion attribution at five years of age. Children’s ve rbal ability (as
measure d by the BPVS) w as also acco unted for in the o verall path analyses.

Take n to ge the r, the results of Dunn e t a l. (1991b) and Meins e t a l. (1998) suggest
that maternal refere nce s to me ntal state s are an impo rtant source o f informatio n for
children’s deve loping unde rstanding o f false be lief and belief-based emo tion. There fore,
w e w e re inte reste d to test w he the r mate rnal refe renc es to mental state s relate to
children’s attributio n o f belief-based e motio n, even amo ng c hildren w ho display an
understan ding o f false belief.

Given the re sults o f Ex perime nt 1, Bradme tz and Schneider (1999), and Hadw in and
Perner (1991), w e focuse d o n children appro x imate ly five ye ars of age. We anticipate d
that the majority o f children at this age w o uld pass the false-belief que stio ns but that a
substantial propo rtio n w o uld fail to make appro priate belief-based attributions.

Method
Participants
Partic ipants w ere 75 children (fro m an initial c oho rt of 100) re cruited fro m a single
large ge neral practice in the Ox fordshire are a serving families across a range o f socio-
eco no mic backgrounds. The initial samp le w as se lecte d as part of a longitudinal study
on infant slee p pro ble ms (full details o f the sample can be found in Morre ll, 1999).
There w ere 39 bo ys and 36 girls betw ee n 4 years 6 mo nths and 6 ye ars (M = 59.80
months; SD = 4.3 months). All children had English as the ir first language .

Procedure

Child measures
Children w ere individually teste d in one sessio n at their ho me. Children w e re given tw o
belief-base d emotion attribution tasks; the Dog–Rabbit Test (Harris e t a l., 1989) and the
HEE version of the MIST as de scribe d for Ex perime nt 1.1 The p rese ntation order o f
these tw o tests w as co unterbalance d. The LEE w as omitted be cause of time co nstraints
and the de sired co ntrast betw een the Do g–Rabbit Test and the HEE.

Children’s language ability w as assesse d using the Test for the Rece ption of Grammar
(TROG; Bisho p, 1989). The TROG w as designed to test the understan ding o f 20 type s o f
grammatic al
teste d using four
multiple-c ho ice questions (one block). For each que stio n, the child w as read a sentenc e
and aske d to choo se from o ne of four image s repre senting that se nte nce . In order that

(syntactic ) c ontrast in English. Eac h contrast w as

1 There were some minor modifications made to the MIST to facilitate overall comprehension of the story and ease of
administration. The details can be found in de Rosnay (2003).

210 Marc de Rosnay et al.

(syntac tic) understanding w as no t c o nfounded by the ir
c hildre n’s grammatic al
vo cabulary, o nly a ve ry small range of nouns, ve rbs, and prepo sitions w ere used
througho ut the test, and children’s know ledge of a cro ss-section of the se vocabulary
ite ms w as first tested.

Maternal measures
Follow ing Meins e t a l. (1998), mo the rs w e re aske d for an o pen-ended descriptio n o f
their child. They w e re aske d, ‘Can yo u describe [child’s name] for me?’ They w ere
given no guidance on ho w to respond, and if they asked for c larificatio n, they w ere
told, ‘You c an talk abo ut anything.’ A single struc tured p rompt w as used to encourage
mo the rs to say mo re, o nce it see med they w ere co ming to the end of their initial
desc ription. Each mo ther w as asked, ‘Can you say mo re?’, irresp ective of her initial
desc ription. Only mo the rs’ re spo nses be fore the pro mpt are repo rte d he re. Maternal
narrative s w ere divided into comments by the primary re searcher and then score d by
for me ntal, be havioural and p hysical attribute s, and general
tw o rate rs (one blind)
co mments. The inter-rate r reliability w as high (Cohe n
= .91). Mental co mments
inc luded any genuine re ferenc e to the c hild’s mental life relating to w ill, mind,
imaginatio n, interest, inte llect, and me ta-cognition. See Me ins e t a l. (1998) for de tails.

Results
The results are repo rte d in three parts. First, w e present the relationship betw ee n
children’s emotion predictio ns and justific atio ns. Sec ond, w e comp are children’s
emotio n attributions and their false-belief unde rstanding. Third, w e c onsider how
syntactic understanding (TROG) and mothers’ use of mental attributes are associated
w ith children’s false -belief unde rstanding, emo tion attributio n, and the lag betw ee n the
tw o.

Children’s emotion attributions
Mo re c hildren made a co rre c t emotio n pre dictio n for the Dog–Rabbit Test (50/75) than
the HEE (37/75). Children failing the emo tion pre dictio n predominantly de scribed the
protagonist as sad. Seven c hildren gave so me other descriptio n o f the p rotagonist’s
emotio n for the HEE (e .g., ‘scared’, ‘just alright’).

Of

the

re maining c hildre n failed to de mo nstra te

children making c orre ct emo tion predictio ns, o ve r 75% provided an
appro priate justific ation for bo th the Dog–Rabbit Test (42/45) and the HEE (28/37).
The
the
protagonist’s mistaken appraisal. Three children making inc orre ct emo tion p redictions
re ferre d to the pro tagonist’s belief (e.g., ‘c os his mummy, he tho ught that w asn’t his
mummy’) and o ne re ferre d to his know le dge (‘because he doesn’t kno w ’). One child
desc ribing To m as frightene d also re fe rre d to his know ledge (‘ ’c os he doesn’t kno w
w ho it is’). The remaining children justified their pre dictio ns in terms o f the objective
situatio n o r outc ome as in Ex periment 1.

an e x p licit ap pre ciation o f

As

in Ex p e rime nt 1,

justificatio ns w e re

inc o rre c t/
uninformative , depending o n w he the r children made an appro priate re ference to the
protagonist’s false belief, mistaken ex pec tatio n, o r restricted know le dge. Emotio n
justificatio ns w e re transcribe d and sco red by the principal re searcher and a seco nd,
indepe nde nt, rate r w ho w as blind to the emo tion pre dictio n. The inter-rater agre ement

c lassified as c o rre c t o r

A lag between understanding false belief and emotion attribution

211

w as 100% for the Dog–Rabbit Te st and 97.3% for the HEE. In both case s, inco nsistency
betw een rate rs on the HEE w as attributable to justific atio ns that re ferre d to belief but
w ere ambiguous w ith respe ct to children’s apprec iation o f the pro tago nist’s mistaken
belief. Differences betw een the rate rs w ere reso lved by confe renc ing; it w as agre ed that
to the pro tagonist’s m ista k e n
the
ex pe ctation, de spite mentio ning be liefs.

in questio n did no t

tw o justifications

refer

to the

re sp onse s

e motion pre dictio n,

Emotion attribution and false-belief understanding
Table 4 p resents childre n’s
e mo tio n
predictio n + justific atio n, and the false -belief question for the Do g–Rabbit Test and
the HEE. While a re lative ly large number o f c hildren failed the emo tion prediction
question but w ent on to answ er the false-belief questio n c orre ctly, fe w er c hildren
passe d the emo tion pre dictio n and w ent on to answ er
the false-belief que stio n
inco rre c tly. A Mc Ne mar Test confirme d significance of this asymmetric al patte rn for the
HEE (p = .005). While the tre nd w as
the
asymmetrical patte rn did no t deviate significantly fro m c hance (p = .210). How eve r,
w he n c hildren making a co rre c t e motio n p rediction + justification w e re e x amine d, this
asymmetrical patte rn de viated fro m chance e x pectation for both the HEE (p < .001) and
the Do g–Rabbit Test (p < .001).

the Do g–Rabbit Test,

the

the

same for

Table 4. Children’s responses on the emotion prediction, emotion prediction + justification (in
parentheses), and false-belief questions for the two belief-based emotion attribution tasks (Dog–Rabbit
test and HEE; N = 75)

Emotion prediction

(correct prediction and justification)

False belief

Dog–Rabbit

HEE

Sad/other (Fail)

Happy (Pass)

Fail
Pass
Fail
Pass

14 (19)
11 (14)
5 (–)
45 (42)

15 (22)
23 (25)
7 (–)
30 (28)

Table 4 also show s

that a small numbe r of children made a corre ct e motio n
predictio n (‘hap py’) but failed the false-be lief test. Ho w ever, none o f the se children had
previously o ffered a satisfacto ry emo tion justification. By contrast, c hildren describing
the pro tago nist as happy and p assing the false-belief question had predominantly given
a suitable e motio n justification.

As in Ex pe riment 1, o nly c hildren making a corre ct pre dictio n and justification w ere
co nsidered to have passed the e motio n attribution. More c hildren made a co rre c t
emo tion attributio n for the Dog–Rabbit Te st than the HEE. To asse ss the significance o f
this patte rn, w e comp are d the pro portion of children passing the emo tion attribution
for the Do g–Rabbit Te st and the HEE using a te st o f tw o bino mial pro portions. A
significantly higher p ropo rtion of children p assed the emotion attribution for the Dog–
Rabbit Test (z = 2.33; p = .02). By contrast, the pro portion o f c hildren passing the false-
belief question on the Dog–Rabbit Test w as no t higher than the HEE (z = .55; n s ).
Furthe rmore , the inter-test reliability for false be lief w as high (Cronbach
= .82). Thus,

212 Marc de Rosnay et al.

w hen the Do g–Rabbit Test and the HEE w ere c ompared direc tly, children made a
co rre c t e motio n attributio n o n the HEE less o ften.

In sum, a lag betw ee n unde rstanding belief and emo tion attribution w as evident for
bo th tasks, and children pe rfo rme d w ith reaso nable c onsiste ntly be tw e en tasks. The re
w as more variatio n in children’s e motio n attributions (Cronbach
= .37), but this w as
ex p ected given the foc al age range addressed in this ex p eriment. As in Ex pe riment 1,
w e co mbined pe rfo rmance o n bo th tasks to yield an overall sco re (from 0 to 2) for false-
belief understan ding (FB) and emo tion attribution (EA).

Individual differences in belief-based emotion attribution and false-belief
understanding
Follow ing the advic e of Bisho p, TROG raw sco res w ere used for the subse quent
analyses. The distribution of sc ores w as normal w ith a mean sc ore of 10.6 (SD = 3.12).
No children had difficulty w ith the vo cabulary items. For the maternal inte rview ,
mo the rs re spo nde d in a very similar manner to Meins e t a l. (1998); the mean number of
attributes w as 6.7 (SD = 3.41). This comp are s closely w ith Me ins e t a l. (1998), w ho
re porte d 7.1 attributes on average. Follow ing Meins e t a l. (1998), w e c alculated the
pro po rtion of mothers’ attributes that w e re mental to c ontro l for variation in maternal
ve rbosity. Only mo the rs’ use of mental attributes is reporte d he re. For further details,
see de Rosnay (2003).

Table 5 gives the Pearso n product moment c orre latio n be tw e en FB, EA, sex , age ,
ve rbal mental age (TROG) and the prop ortio n o f mental attributes used by mo the rs
(MM). Table 5 show s that bo th TROG and MM w ere p ositively co rre lated w ith both FB
and EA. How eve r, the re w as no inte r-co rre latio n betw een TROG and MM, suggesting
that these fac tors may be inde pendently related to FB and EA. Surprisingly, age w as no t
associated w ith FB or EA, altho ugh this may reflec t the mo re narro w age range o f the
sample w hen co mpared w ith Ex periment 1. Age w as, ho w ever, corre lated w ith TROG.
Again, w e found no relationship betw een gende r and either FB o r EA. Thus, ge nde r w as
dropp ed fro m further analyses.

To asse ss the c ontribution o f TROG and MM to FB and EA, o rdinal logistic re gression
using a forw ard selec tion pro cedure w as used. Age w as include d in all regression
analyses bec ause of the co rre lation be tw e en age and TROG. This assump tion o f equal

Table 5. Pearson correlation coefficients for false belief (FB), belief-based emotion attribution (EA),
sex, age, children’s syntactic understanding (TROG) and mothers’ use of mental attributes (MM) for
their child (N = 75)

Variable

1. False belief (FB)
2. Emotion attribution (EA)
3. Sex
4. Age
5. TROG
6. MM

**p < .01.

1. FB

–

2. EA

.72**

–

3. Sex

4. Age

5. TROG

6. MM

.06
.02
–

.14
.01
.11
–

.50**
.43**
.13
.30**

–

.35**
.43**
.04
.14
.13
–

A lag between understanding false belief and emotion attribution

213

slo pes w as me t (the Prop ortio nal Odds Assumption w as not violated)
analyse s.

for all thre e

In the first regression mo del, the co ntributio n of age, TROG, and MM to FB w as
asse sse d. Both TROG and MM had a significant impac t o n FB, and age w as dro pped
from the final model. After the influence o f MM had been acco unte d for, every unit
impro veme nt on the TROG meant that c hildren w e re 1.6 times mo re likely to pass an
additional FB question (95%CI 1.3–2.0, p < .001). Afte r the influenc e o f TROG had bee n
ac counted for, a 10% increase in MM me ant that children w e re 1.6 time s more likely to
pass an additional FB questio n (95% CI 1.6–1.7, p < .001).

In the seco nd regression mo de l, the c ontribution of age , TROG, and MM to EA w as
asse sse d. Bo th TROG and MM had a significant impact on EA, and age w as dro pped
from the final model. After the influence o f MM had been acco unte d for, every unit
impro veme nt on the TROG meant that c hildren w e re 1.3 times mo re likely to pass an
additional e motio n attribution (95% CI 1.1–1.6, p < .001). After the influenc e of TROG
had be en acc ounted for, a 10%increase in MM meant that children w ere 1.5 times mo re
likely to pass an additional emo tion attribution (95% CI 1.5–1.6, p < .001).

To be sure that TROG and MM made a truly indepe nde nt contribution to EA, a third
regression w as carried o ut in w hich the asso ciation be tw e en FB and EA w as ac counted
for before the effec ts o f age, TROG, and MM to EA w ere co nsidere d. In this final
regression, FB w as stro ngly related to EA. For each additional false-belief que stio n
answ e red co rre c tly, children w ere 17.9 times more likely to pass an additional emo tion
attributio n (95% CI 6.2–75.5; p < .001). Both age and TROG w e re dro pped fro m the
final model. How e ver, MM still had a significant impac t o n EA, even w he n the
co ntributio n o f FB to EA had already bee n taken into acco unt. For every 10% increment
in MM, children w ere 1.4 times mo re likely to pass an additional e motio n attribution
(95% CI 1.3–1.4, p < .05).

Altho ugh the o verall prop o rtio n o f me ntal-state

attributes w as use d in this
ex pe riment, other authors have po inte d o ut that the total amount o f me ntal-state talk
might be a mo re informative measure; mothers w ho spe ak mo re about the mind—in
absolute te rms—co uld pro vide their c hildren w ith additional re levant linguistic inp ut
(Ruffman, Slade , & Cro w e , 2002). Thus, w e c onducte d a sec ond set o f identical analyse s
w ith children’s raw sco res for MM rather than prop ortio nal sc ore s. The ove rall p atte rn
of findings w as virtually identical.

Discussion
Ex perime nt 2 co nfirmed the lag betw ee n false-be lief understanding and belief-based
emo tion attribution. There w ere more children passing the false-belief questio n and
failing the e motio n attributio n than the reverse patte rn (see Table 4). Also, c hildren
made a c orre ct emo tion pre dictio n for the HEE less ofte n than in the Do g–Rabbit Test.
This latte r finding supports the conclusion of Ex perime nt 1; the visible absence of any
ne gative
to identify the
pro tagonist’s emotion but not his false be lief.

in the Do g–Rabbit Test) made

emotion (i.e.

it easie r

Ex periment 2 foc used on the relationship betw ee n c hildren’s

syntac tic under-
standing (TROG), mothers’ mental-state language (MM), and children’s ability to
understan d the link betw ee n belief and e motio n. In suppo rt o f p revious re search, it w as
found that syntac tic unde rstanding w as co rre lated w ith bo th false-be lief understanding
(Astingto n & Jenkins, 1999) and e motio n attribution (Po ns e t a l., 2003). Also, it w as

214 Marc de Rosnay et al.

language

re lated to bo th false -be lief
found that mo the rs’ use o f me ntal-state
understanding and emo tion attribution, eve n though this measure did no t directly
tap mother—child disc ourse. These results re plicate tho se o f Meins e t a l. (1998). In
addition, mothers’ mental-state language made a significant c ontribution to children’s
belief-based emo tio n attributio ns, even w hen understanding of false belief had been
acco unte d for. Thus, o ur
input makes a greater
co ntribution to children’s c apacity to see the link betw een belief and e motio n than
does children’s syntactic understanding (TROG). The se findings are discussed in more
detail be low .

suggest that mate rnal

findings

GENERAL DISCUSSION
The curre nt ex perime nts and those o f Bradmetz and Schneider (1999), Hadw in and
Perner (1991), Harris e t a l. (1989), and Ruffman and Ke enan (1996) reve al a co nsiste nt
lag be tw e en children’s understanding of false be lief and the co rre c t attributio n o f be lief-
based emo tion. Our results also sho w that linguistic ability in the semantic (BPVS) and
syntactic (TROG) domain, and linguistic input (mo thers’ use of me ntal-state language
w hen describing their children) c orre late w ith children’s understanding o f false belief
and belief-based e motio n. Be low , w e disc uss the implications o f these findings w ith
re sp e c t
lag be tw e e n
understanding be lief and e motio n attribution.

to c hildre n’s de ve lop ing the o ry-of-mind abilities and the

If w e focus first on verbal ability, our results fit square ly w ithin a gro w ing body of
re search that demo nstrate s the impo rtance o f children’s verbal ability for theo ry-of-
mind understanding. Verbal ability has be en sho w n to contribute to both false-be lief
understanding (Astington & Jenkins, 1999; Bradme tz, 1998; de Villiers, 2000; Happe´ ,
1995; Jenkins & Astington, 1996) and c hildren’s e motio n unde rstanding (Cutting &
Dunn, 1999; Po ns e t a l., 2003). Admittedly, our results do not clarify w hich aspect of
language is o f greate r importance because w e did not direc tly co mpare semantic
(Ex perime nt 1) and syntac tic (Ex periment 2) ability. No r do o ur re sults allow us to infer
the dire ction of causation betw een verbal ability and the ory-o f-mind understanding.
How e ver, rece nt longitudinal re search offers good supp ort for the c onc lusion that
language
re ve rse
(Astingto n & Jenkins, 1999; Ruffman e t a l., 2002).

the o ry-o f-mind unde rstanding rathe r

ability p re dic ts

than the

input ge nuinely p romo tes

We also demonstrated that the propo rtion of mental attributes use d by mo the rs
w hen de scribing the ir children makes a significant indepe nde nt co ntributio n to
children’s theo ry-of-mind understanding. Again, this relationship doe s not allow us to
infer the dire ction of c ausatio n. As noted by Dunn e t a l. (1991b), suc h a re lationship
co uld c ome abo ut bec ause mate rnal
the child’s so cial
co gnition. Alte rnative ly, child c harac teristics—such as earlier theory-o f-mind ability—
may elicit a particular type o f mate rnal input. Accumulating e vidence make s the latte r
interpre tation inc reasingly implausible . First, Ruffman e t a l.
(2002) have re cently
show n that mo the rs’ use o f me ntal state utte rance s pre dicts later theo ry-of-mind
abilities, but the reve rse re lationship doe s no t hold. Furthermo re , the relationship
betw ee n mate rnal mental-state language and children’s later theo ry-of-mind under-
standing remained, e ven w hen e arlier
the ory-o f-mind, earlier child me ntal-state
utte rance s, earlier child language, maternal education (SES), and age w e re co ntro lled
for. These findings stro ngly suggest that mate rnal mental-state language has a causal
effect o n children’s theo ry-of-mind understan ding.

A lag between understanding false belief and emotion attribution

215

The pre sent study adds further suppo rt to this conclusion. Ruffman e t a l. (2002)
asse sse d maternal mental-state language w hen the mother w as in co nversatio n w ith he r
child. Arguably, characteristic s o f the c hild that w e re no t assessed by the investigato rs
(e.g., an inte rest in peo ple and relationships) affecte d the mo ther’s c onversatio nal style
as w ell as the c hild’s late r theo ry-of-mind performanc e. In the prese nt study, ho w eve r,
ve ry similar
re sults w e re o btaine d w h e n mate rnal disc o urs e w as me asure d,
inde pendent of the child’s mode o f c onversatio n. Specifically, mo the rs’ references to
mental state s w ere assesse d w he n they described their c hildren and no t w hen they
w ere in conversation w ith them. More gene rally, these findings suggest that the
differential te nde ncy to refer to mental states is a stable charac teristic of the mo the r that
can be e licited in different co ntex ts.

Individual differences in linguistic ability and input also sp eak dire ctly to the lag
be tw e e n unde rstanding false be lief and e mo tio n attributio n. Re gre ssion 3 in
Ex perime nt 1 sho w ed that inc reased verbal mental age (BPVS) improved children’s
pro bability o f p assing mo re belief-base d emo tion attributio ns, even after the ir succ ess
on the false-belief que stio ns had been ac co unted for. Similarly, regre ssio n 3 in
Ex perime nt 2 show ed that a higher percentage of mate rnal mental-state attributes w hen
de scribing their children improved c hildren’s probability of p assing mo re e motio n
attributio ns, e ven after the ir succ ess on the false-be lief questions had been ac counted
for. Thus, the findings show that linguistic ability and maternal linguistic input are
important for emo tion understan ding, even after any underlying relationship w ith false-
belief understanding has bee n acc ounted for. The se findings are unique in that they
de monstrate the sustained importance o f verbal ability and mate rnal input for children’s
theory-o f-mind understanding. Typically, theo ry-of-mind researc h has foc used on false-
belief understanding (Astingto n, 2001; Wellman, Cro ss, & Watso n, 2001). Our results
indicate that even w hen that important milesto ne has been reache d, ve rbal ability and
maternal input co ntinue to p lay a role in helping c hildren to reach a later milesto ne ,
namely an unde rstanding o f belief-based emotion.

Therefore , to e x plain the lag betw een understan ding be lief and e motio n attributio n,
it is impo rtant to give co nsideration to the contribution of linguistic ability and input. It
co uld be argue d that the lag is sc arc ely surprising because it simply takes time for
children to make use of their new -found understan ding of belief w hen anticipating a
pro tagonist’s re actions. How e ver, this ex planation is to o general. When children are
aske d to pre dict ho w a protagonist w ill act given that he or she holds a false be lief,
ex isting data show that 4- and 5-year-olds are quite ac curate in making suc h actio n
predictio ns (Bradmetz & Sc hne ider, 1999; We llman e t a l., 2001). Ho w ever, as w e have
se en, c hildren of this age w ill o ften make mistakes in predicting ho w a protago nist w ill
fe el. An adequate ex planation o f the lag be tw e en understan ding false be lief and
emo tion attributio n should ex plain w hy 4- and 5-ye ar-o lds typ ic ally understand that
false beliefs guide actio n but at the same time ofte n fail to unde rstand that false beliefs
can gene rate emotio n.

An alternative argument is that many emo tional reactio ns, especially overt reactio ns
of joy, ange r, or fe ar, are typically the immediate result o f an obje ctive c hange in a
person’s ex ternal c ircumstances. Only occ asionally do emotional reactions ste m fro m a
misre presentation of tho se circumstance s. By co ntrast, c urre nt actio ns are rare ly the
immediate re sult of suc h obje ctive c hange. Inste ad, they are typically the result of a
person’s ongoing plans and ex p ectatio ns. Such future -oriented ex pe ctatio ns can be
ac curate, but they may often turn o ut to be false. On this argument, yo ung children are
slo w to make belief-base d attributio ns o f emo tion bec ause they are rare ly called for,

216 Marc de Rosnay et al.

unlike be lief-based attributio ns of actio n. Instead, an analysis o f the obje ctive situatio n
fac ing the pro tagonist is typically sufficie nt to ex plain his or he r emotional reactions.
This analysis is co nsistent w ith the reality-base d justifications that younge r c hildren
o ffered. Ruffman and Kee nan (1996) have similarly argued that children find it harder to
associate be lief w ith surprise than ac tion be cause children’s early c onc ept o f surp rise is
ro oted in desirable events, w he reas eve n 2- and 3-year-olds understand that actio ns are
re late d to thinking (hypothetic al be liefs) as w ell as desire s. Thus, w hen children co me
to understand false be lief, this insight ex tends naturally to the ir concep t o f actio n. By
co ntrast, children must form a ne w co nce pt o f surp rise that inco rpo rate s belief.

Ho w might linguistic input and linguistic ability c ontribute to children’s under-
standing of
surprise and belief-based e motio n more generally? In line w ith the
interpre tations offered abo ve, children’s e x perience of o the r pe ople’s points-o f-vie w
(i.e., be liefs, thoughts, emo tio ns, etc.) thro ugh co nve rsational and soc ial ex change s
should facilitate the ir ability to make be lief-based e motio n attributio ns. Arguably,
mo the rs w ho mo re often de scribe their c hildren in mentalistic terms pro vide pre cisely
this kind o f informatio n and, hence, promo te the ir c hildren’s belief-base d e motio n
attributio ns. Similarly, c hildren w ho are more linguistic ally able may bette r unde rstand
and incorporate such informatio n.

the

that oc curs

ex c hange of view po ints

The e x ac t me chanism by w hich linguistic ability and mate rnal linguistic input affect
theo ry-of-mind understanding is too bro ad a topic for the curre nt pape r. The orists have
variously e mphasized the impo rtance of me ntal-state refere nces pe r se (e.g. Ruffman e t
a l., 2002), syntac tic co mpete nce , e spe cially the maste ry of c omple me nt structure s (de
Villiers, 2000), o r
in w e ll-coo rdinate d
co nversation (Harris, 1996, in p ress; Nelso n, 1996). Here, w e simply stre ss that verbal
ability and maternal inp ut are likely to be compleme ntary, rathe r than comp eting,
fac tors promoting the de velopment of children’s theo ry-of-mind abilities (Astingto n,
2001). In Ex perime nt 2, w e found that bo th syntactic compete nce and ve rbal input
made a significant indepe nde nt contribution to children’s suc cess o n the false-be lief
tasks and e motio n understanding. Similarly, Ruffman e t a l. (2002) have sho w n that
semantic co mpetenc e and mate rnal me ntal-state language make inde pendent co ntribu-
tio ns to c hildren’s theo ry-of-mind understan ding.

In c onc lusion, o ur results c onfirm the ex istence o f a robust lag betw ee n false-be lief
unde rstanding and the understan ding o f be lief-base d emo tio n. They sho w that
individual differences in verbal ability and mate rnal input are impo rtant in helping
children to o vercome this lag.

Acknowledgements
We w ould like to thank the Rho des Trust and the Oxfordshire Health Se rvic es Researc h
Co mmittee and asso ciated Charitable Funds for financial support o f this research. We w ould also
like to thank the mothers and children w ho participated in this researc h and gave so gene rously
of their time . Finally, w e w o uld like to ac know ledge the c ontributions of the three anonymous
review e rs for their constructive and thoughtful criticism.

References
Agre sti, A. (1996). An in tro d u c tio n to c a te g o ric a l d a ta a n a ly sis . New Yo rk: Wiley.

A lag between understanding false belief and emotion attribution

217

Ainsw orth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Pa tte rn s o f a ttac h m e n t: A

p sy c h o lo gic a l stu d y o f th e Stra n g e Situ a tio n . Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Astington, J. W. (2001). The future of theory-of-mind re se arch: Understanding motivational states,

the role of language, and real-w orld consequence s. Ch ild De v e lo p m e n t, 72(3), 685–687.

Astington, J. W., & Jenkins, J. M. (1999). A longitudinal study of the relation betw e en language

and theo ry-of-mind developme nt. De v e lo p m e n ta l Ps yc h o lo g y , 35(5), 1311–1320.

Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. M. (1995). Ch ildre n ’s

ta lk a b o u t th e m in d . New Yo rk: Ox ford

University Press.

Bender, R., & Benner, A.

(2000) Calc ulating ordinal regression models in SAS and S-Plus.

Bio m e tric a l Jo u rn a l, 42(6), 677–699.

Bishop, D. V. M. (1989). Te st fo r th e re c e p tio n o f g ra m m a r (TRO G) (2nd ed.). Ox ford: University

of Oxford.

Bradmetz, J. (1998). Acquisition of a the ory o f mind and intellectual developme nt in the c hild

aged 3 to 5. Ca h ie rs d e Ps y c h o lo g ie Co g n itiv e , 17(1), 95–113.

Bradmetz, J., & Schneider, R. (1999). Is Little Re d Riding Hoo d afraid o f her grandmothe r?
o f De v e lo p m e n ta l

Cognitive vs. e mo tional respo nse to a false be lief. Br itish Jo u rn a l
Ps y c h o lo g y , 17, 501–514.

Cutting, A. L., & Dunn, J. (1999). Theory-of-mind, e motion unde rstanding, Language, and family

background: Individual differences and interrelations. Ch ild De v e lo p m e n t, 70(4), 853–865.

De nham, S. A.

(1986). So cial co gnition, prosoc ial be havio r, and emotion in preschoolers:

Contex tual validation. Ch ild De v e lo p m e n t, 57, 194–201.

de Ro snay, M. (2003). Ch ildre n ’s u n d e rsta n d in g o f e m o tio n : Th e

ro le s o f a ttac h m e n t a n d

m a te rn a l d isc o u rse . Unpublished Docto ral Thesis, University of Oxford.

de Rosnay, M., & Harris, P. L. (2002). Individual differe nces in children’s understanding of
emotion: The roles of attachment and language. Atta c h m e n t & Hu m a n De v e lo p m e n t, 4(1),
39–54.

de Villiers, J. (2000). Language and the ory-of-mind: What are the developmental relationships? In
S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Un d e rsta n d in g o th e r m in d s:
Pe rs p e c tiv e s fro m d e v e lo p m e n ta l c o g n itive n e u ro s c ie n c e . Ox ford: Ox ford University Press.
Dunn, J., Bro w n, J., & Be ardsall, L. (1991a). Family talk abo ut fe eling states and children’s later

understanding of others’ emotions. De v e lo p m e n ta l Ps y c h o lo g y, 27, 448–455.

Dunn, J., Brow n, J. R., Slomkow ski, C., Tesla, C., & Youngblade, L. (1991b). Young children’s
Individual differe nce s and their

feelings and be liefs:

understanding of o ther pe ople’s
ante cede nts. Ch ild De v e lo p m e n t, 62, 1352–1366.

Dunn, L. M., Dunn, L. M., Whetton, C., & Pintille, D. (1982). Th e British Pic tu re Vo c a b u la ry
Sc a le . Ad a p te d fro m th e Pe a b o d y Pic tu re Vo c a b u la ry Te st—Re v ise d Ed itio n . Windso r, UK:
NFER-NELSON.

Hadw in, J., & Pe rner, J. (1991). Please d and surprised: Children’s c ognitive the ory of e mo tion.

Br itish Jo u rn a l o f De v e lo p m e n ta l Ps y c h o lo g y , 9(2), 215–234.

Happe´ , F. (1995). The role of age and verbal ability in the the ory-of-mind task performance of

subjec ts w ith autism. Ch ild De v e lo p m e n t, 66, 843–855.

Harris, P. L. (in press). Conversation, pretenc e and theory of mind. In J. W. Astington & J. Baird

(Eds.), Wh y la n gu a ge m a tte rs fo r th e o ry o f m in d . Ox ford, UK: Ox fo rd University Press.

Harris, P. L. (1996). Desires, beliefs, and language . In P. Carruthers & P. K. Smith (Eds.), Th e o rie s

o f th e o rie s o f m in d . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Harris, P. L., Johnson, C. N., Hutton, D., Andrew s, G., & Co oke, T. (1989). Yo ung children’s

theory-of-mind and emotion. Co g n itio n a n d Em o tio n , 3(4), 379–400.

Hresko , W. P., Reid, D. K., & Hammill, D. D. (1981). Th e Te st o f Ea rly La n g u a g e De v e lo p m e n t

(TELD). Austin, TX: Pro -Ed.

Hughes, C., & Dunn, J. (1998). Understanding mind and emotion: Longitudinal associations w ith

me ntal state talk betw een friends. De v e lo p m e n ta l Ps y c h o lo gy , 34, 1026–1037.

Jenkins, J. M., & Astington, J. W. (1996). Cognitive factors and family structure associated w ith

theory-of-mind deve lo pment in young children. De v e lo p m e n ta l Ps yc h o lo g y , 32(1), 70–78.

218 Marc de Rosnay et al.

Meins, E. (1998). The effects o f sec urity of attachment and maternal attribution of meaning o n

children’s linguistic ac quisitional style. In fa n t Be h a v io r & De v e lo p m e n t, 21(2), 237–252.

Meins, E., & Fernyho ugh, C. (1998). Linguistic acquisio nal style and mentalising development:

The ro le of maternal mind-minde dness. Co g n itive De v e lo p m e n t, 14, 363–380.

Meins, E., Fernyhough, C., Russell, J., & Clark-Carter, D. (1998). Se curity of attachment as a
pre dictor of symbolic and mentalising abilities: A lo ngitudinal study. So c ia l De v e lo p m e n t,
7(1), 1–24.

Morrell, J. M. B. (1999). The role of mate rnal co gnitions in infant sle ep problems as asse ssed by a
new instrument, the Maternal Cognitions about Infant Sleep Questionnaire. Jo u rn a l o f Ch ild
Ps y c h o lo gy a n d Ps y c h ia try a n d Allie d Disc ip lin e s , 40(2), 247–258.

Nelson, K (1996). La n gu a ge in c o g n itiv e d e v e lo p m e n t. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Perner, J. (1991). Un d e rs ta n d in g th e re p re se n ta tio n a l m in d . Cambridge, MA: MIT Pre ss.
Pons, F., Law son, J., Harris, P. L., & de Ro snay, M. (2003). Individual differences in children’s
emotion understanding: Effects of age and language. Sc a n d in a v ia n Jo u rn a l o f Ps yc h o lo g y , 44,
347–353.

Renfrew , C. E. (1991). Th e Bu s Sto ry : A te st o f n a rra tiv e sp e e c h . Ox ford, UK: Winslo w Press.
Ruffman, T., & Keenan, T. R. (1996). The belief-based emotion o f surprise: The case for a lag in

understanding relative to false belief. De v e lo p m e n ta l Ps y c h o lo gy , 32(1), 40–49.

Ruffman, T., Slade, L., & Crow e , E. (2002). The relation betw e en childre n’s and mother’s mental

state language and the ory-o f-mind understanding. Ch ild De v e lo p m e n t, 73(3), 734–751.

Wec hsler, D. (1967). Ma n u a l fo r th e We c h sle r p re sc h o o l a n d p rim a ry sc a le o f in te llige n c e . New

York: Psychological Corpo ration.

Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis of theo ry-of-mind development: The

truth about false belief. Ch ild De v e lo p m e n t, 72(3), 655–684.

Received 19 September 2001; revised version received 16 May 2003

