Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Theory of Mind in Middle Childhood: Longitudinal Associations with Executive 

Function and Social Competence 

Rory T. Devine, Naomi White, Rosie Ensor & Claire Hughes 

University of Cambridge 

 

Author Note 

Center for Family Research, Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Free 

School Lane, Cambridge CB23RQ, United Kingdom. Rory T. Devine was funded by a 

Graduate Research Scholarship from St John’s College, Cambridge. Naomi White was 

funded by a Rutherford Memorial International Scholarship from the Rutherford Foundation. 

Rosie Ensor was funded by a British Academy Post-Doctoral Fellowship. The first wave of 

data collection for this study was funded by a grant from the Economic and Social Research 

Council to Claire Hughes. We would like to acknowledge Keri Wong for her assistance with 

recruitment and data collection. Correspondence should be sent to Rory T. Devine via 

electronic mail: rtd24@cam.ac.uk 

Key Words: Theory of Mind, Executive Function, Social Competence, Middle Childhood, 

Longitudinal.  

 

 

 

 

1 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Theory of Mind in Middle Childhood: Longitudinal Associations with Executive 

Function and Social Competence 

Abstract 

The vast majority of studies on theory of mind have focused on the preschool years. 

Extending the developmental scope of theory-of-mind (ToM) research presents opportunities 

to both reassess theoretical accounts of ToM and test its predictive utility. The twin aims of 

this longitudinal study were to examine developmental relations between ToM, executive 

function (EF) and teacher-rated social competence in middle childhood. 137 children (69 

males) were followed across a 4-year period spanning middle childhood (M Ages at Waves 1 

and 2 = 6.05, SD= .35, and 10.81, SD = .35). Individual differences in ToM were moderately 

stable across middle childhood. While there were concurrent associations between ToM and 

EF at both time points, there were no longitudinal links between these constructs. In contrast, 

there were concurrent and longitudinal links between ToM and teacher-rated social 

competence, such that individual differences in ToM predicted later social competence at 

school. These results are discussed in light of competing theories about the links between 

ToM and EF and the importance of individual differences in ToM for children’s social lives. 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Theory of Mind in Middle Childhood: Longitudinal Associations with Executive 

Function and Social Competence 

Scientific interest in the human ability to reason about mental states and how children acquire 

a ‘theory of mind’ (ToM), has flourished over the past three decades, with lively debate still 

evident in developmental psychology and numerous related disciplines (for reviews see: 

Hughes & Devine, 2015; Wellman, 2014). Recent years have seen a massive expansion in the 

developmental scope of this research field, with exciting new findings from studies of 

infancy (e.g., Baillargeon, Scott & He, 2010), middle childhood (e.g. Devine & Hughes, 

2013), adolescence (e.g., Dumontheil, Apperly & Blakemore, 2010) and adulthood (e.g., 

Duval, Piolino, Bejanin, Eustache & Desgranges, 2011). Nevertheless, an overwhelming 

majority of studies have continued to focus on the preschool years. A further limit to research 

in this area has been a heavy reliance on cross-sectional designs that preclude analysis of 

developmental relations. Addressing these twin gaps, the current longitudinal study examined 

developmental relations across middle childhood between individual differences in ToM and 

two key correlates: (i.) executive function (EF) and (ii.) social competence.  

ToM and EF in Middle Childhood 

 

Executive Function (EF) is an umbrella term that encompasses the set of higher-order 

cognitive abilities involved in controlling thought and action. These include over-riding 

habitual responses (‘inhibition’), shifting between tasks (‘cognitive set shifting’) and holding 

information in mind to guide future action (‘working memory’) (Carlson, Zelazo & Faja, 

2013). These processes are measured using tasks that appear quite distinct on the surface but 

are thought to measure a common underlying ability. The typically modest correlations 

between different measures of EF reflect the task impurity problem: differences in the non-

 

3 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

executive demands of tasks designed to measure EF (that is, the surface or task-specific 

features) are assumed to mask underlying commonalities (Miyake & Friedman, 2012; 

Miyake et al., 2000). To overcome this problem studies often adopt an aggregate approach to 

assessing EF via a number of different tasks designed to capture inhibition, set shifting, 

working memory or some combination thereof (Miyake & Friedman, 2012).  

In a recent meta-analysis of data from 102 studies involving almost 10,000 3- to 6-

year-old children from 15 countries, Devine and Hughes (2014) reported a moderate mean 

effect size for the correlation between one aspect of ToM (i.e., false belief understanding) and 

EF, r = .38. The goal of the meta-analysis was to test the predictions from competing 

theoretical accounts of the association between ToM and EF. According to the expression 

account, these constructs share overlapping peripheral task demands such that performance 

on measures designed to index ToM requires some degree of executive control (Perner, Lang 

& Kloo, 2002). In other words, EF is not developmentally linked with ToM. In contrast, 

others have proposed at least two distinct (and competing) functional relations between EF 

and ToM (Perner & Lang, 2000). For example, several theorists have posited that the 

acquisition of ToM is necessary for the development or emergence of EF (e.g., Carruthers, 

1996; Perner & Lang, 1999). Specifically, understanding the relation between mental states 

and behavior (meta-representation) enables children to control their own thoughts and 

actions. Other theorists have argued that EF enables children to attend to and reflect upon 

others’ mental states and so permits the growth of ToM (e.g., Russell, 1996). Supporting a 

hybrid ‘emergence-expression’ account, the meta-analysis revealed that the correlation 

between ToM and EF was stable in magnitude across age groups (from ages 3 to 6), different 

EF tasks and geographical regions but was weaker for indirect measures of ToM (i.e., tasks 

involving looking time responses) than for direct measures of ToM (i.e., tasks involving an 

 

4 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

explicit verbal or motor response). The available longitudinal data showed an asymmetric 

developmental association between EF and ToM: while early EF predicted later ToM (even 

when controlling for previous ToM and verbal ability) early ToM did not predict later EF.  

While much has been learned about the links between ToM and EF in the preschool 

years, relatively little is known about the association between these constructs in middle 

childhood. It is possible that the developmental association between ToM and EF might 

change beyond the preschool years; if only because middle childhood (the period from ages 6 

to 11) is, in most cultures, characterized by entry into formal primary education. As a result 

children are exposed to increasingly sophisticated forms of knowledge (e.g., fictional 

literature), new expectations about regulating their behavior, and widening social horizons 

through interactions with peers and adults outside the family (Del Giudice, 2014). Alongside 

evidence for parallel age-related improvements across middle childhood and adolescence in 

both EF (e.g., Davidson, Amso, Anderson & Diamond, 2006; Huizinga, Dolan & Van Der 

Molen, 2006) and ToM (e.g., Apperly, Warren, Andrews, Grant &Todd, 2011; Devine & 

Hughes, 2013), recent cross-sectional studies show correlations between measures of these 

two constructs in middle childhood (e.g., Lagattuta, Sayfan & Blattman, 2010; Lagattuta, 

Sayfan & Harvey, 2014). However, the findings from these cross-sectional studies do not 

demonstrate that there are developmental links between EF and ToM beyond the preschool 

years.  

The expansion of research on ToM into middle childhood (and beyond) raises 

important measurement questions, for which the competence/performance distinction (e.g., 

Meins, Fernyhough, Johnson & Lidstone, 2006) may be helpful. By middle childhood there is 

little doubt that children understand mental-state concepts such as beliefs and desires (i.e., 

 

5 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

ToM competence). Thus individual differences in middle childhood might reflect variation in 

children’s ability to use this understanding flexibly and appropriately (i.e., ToM 

performance). Support for this proposal comes from recent studies (e.g., Apperly, Warren, 

Andrews, Grant &Todd, 2011; Banerjee et al., 2011) that show age-related differences in 

performance on the same task items across middle childhood on a range of ToM tasks that do 

not require any new conceptual insights. For example, Apperly et al. (2011) found age-

related increases in performance across middle childhood on a task that required participants 

to judge which of two boxes a protagonist would look in for an object (i.e., to understand 

first-order false beliefs). As the authors suggest, it is unlikely that changes in children’s 

conceptual understanding underpin such age-related contrasts. 

The current longitudinal study applied age-appropriate batteries of tasks for each 

time-point (ages 6 and 10) that were designed to assess individual differences in children’s 

ability to reason about others’ beliefs, knowledge and desires. At the first time-point we used 

a task battery devised by Hughes et al. (2000), which has been shown to have good test-retest 

reliability and internal consistency and to be sensitive to individual differences in a sample of 

1116 pairs of 5-year-old twins (Hughes et al., 2005). This battery consisted of picture-book 

and puppet-based tasks designed to measure first- and second-order false belief 

understanding as well as the ability to infer emotions linked to false beliefs. For the second 

time point, we constructed a novel multi-modal task battery that included two widely-used 

‘advanced’ ToM tasks, the Strange Stories task (Happé, 1994) and the Triangles Task 

(Castelli et al., 2000), as well as one recently-designed task: the Silent Film task (Devine & 

Hughes, 2013). These three tasks used text-based vignettes, animated geometric figures and 

short clips from a silent film to depict social scenarios and children were required to refer to 

characters’ mental states in order to explain their actions. Despite the growth in the number 

 

6 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

and type of available ‘advanced’ ToM tasks suitable for use in middle childhood, little 

consideration has been given to the relations between tasks purporting to measure ToM in 

this developmental period. By including a battery of diverse ToM tasks we hoped to assess 

both these inter-relations and the links between performance on ‘advanced’ tasks and classic 

tests of first- and second-order false belief understanding.  

Our first aim was to elucidate the nature of the links between individual differences in 

ToM and EF in middle childhood. To this end, we assessed children’s performance in each 

domain at two time points spanning middle childhood at ages 6 and 10 (i.e., when children 

were in their first and final years of primary school). Our goal was to test the predictions 

from competing theoretical accounts based on findings from preschoolers. Specifically, the 

expression account predicts concurrent but not longitudinal links between these constructs. 

That is, while EF might be implicated in the use of ToM (and hence shows concurrent 

associations with ToM performance), it will not play a role in the development of ToM 

(Apperly, 2011). In contrast, two other accounts predict both concurrent and longitudinal 

associations between EF and ToM. For proponents of the meta-representation account (e.g., 

Perner & Lang, 1999), longitudinal associations would be expected between early ToM and 

later EF (only), while proponents of the emergence account (e.g., Hughes, 1998) would 

predict significant independent associations between early EF and later ToM (but not vice-

versa). Meta-analytic evidence from preschoolers favors the latter account, but the nature of 

the association between ToM and EF has yet to be investigated in middle childhood.  

ToM, EF and Social Competence in Middle Childhood 

The vigor with which ToM has been researched over the past 30 years reflects a 

widely held assumption that ToM is a central foundation of everyday social interaction 

 

7 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

(Ratcliffe, 2007). The growing recognition that typically developing children show striking 

variation in ToM led to speculation that these normative individual differences underpin key 

social outcomes in children’s lives (Dunn et al., 1991). This drove the development of the 

‘social individual differences’ account of ToM (Apperly, 2012). Although a large number of 

studies have demonstrated the influence of children’s early social experiences on later 

individual differences in ToM (Hughes & Devine, 2015) there is less evidence to support the 

view that ToM matters for social competence. Findings from existing cross-sectional studies 

are mixed. Some studies show moderate to strong correlations between false belief 

understanding and adult ratings of young children’s social competence (e.g., Watson, Nixon, 

Wilson & Capage, 1999) while others have failed to replicate these findings (e.g., Astington, 

2003; Newton & Jenvey, 2011). In middle childhood, researchers have found weak to 

moderate links between ToM and peer-rated acceptance (Banerjee, Watling & Caputi, 2011) 

and self-rated loneliness (Devine & Hughes, 2013). These findings might indicate that 

individual differences in ToM matter more for children’s social competence in middle 

childhood than in the early years. 

A more critical examination of these findings exposes two shortcomings in the 

literature. First, Astington (2003) has highlighted the need to rule out potentially spurious 

associations between ToM and social competence reflecting, for example, shared links with 

language ability. Alongside language, links between EF and social competence have also 

been reported in early childhood (e.g. Razza & Blair, 2009; Rhoades, Greenberg & 

Domitrovich, 2009). Studies of the link between ToM and social competence in middle 

childhood have yet to account for the potentially confounding effects of EF. Second, the 

existing evidence in support of the social individual differences account is largely cross-

sectional and so open to at least two possible explanations (Astington, 2003). That is, while 

 

8 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

the ability to reason about others’ mental states may impact on children’s social behavior, it 

is equally possible that early acquisition of learned social behaviors facilitates children’s 

performance on ToM tasks.  

To date, longitudinal studies of the association between ToM and social competence 

in early and middle childhood have revealed mixed findings regarding the direction of 

association between these two constructs (e.g., Jenkins & Astington, 2000; Banerjee et al., 

2011). Our second aim was therefore to examine the cross-sectional and longitudinal 

associations between ToM and teacher’s ratings of children’s social competence in school 

settings. We sought to extend the literature in two ways. Firstly, we controlled for potentially 

confounding factors such as individual differences in EF, verbal ability and socio-economic 

status in our analyses. Secondly, the availability of measures of ToM, EF and social 

competence at two time points permitted us to assess the direction of any developmental 

associations between these constructs across a 4-year period in middle childhood.  

 

To summarize, our study had two primary aims. The first aim was to investigate 

whether EF and ToM continue to be developmentally (i.e., functionally) related across 

middle childhood, by examining cross sectional and longitudinal associations between EF 

and ToM. We were also able to gather teachers’ ratings of social competence at each time-

point and so our second aim was to examine the relations between individual differences 

ToM, EF and social competence in middle childhood.    

Method 

Participants 

 

9 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Participants were recruited from a panel of 184 children who had previously taken 

part in longitudinal study tracking children’s social and cognitive development from ages 4 to 

6 years. We achieved 90% contact (re-establishing contact with 166/184 families). Thirteen 

children were not eligible to take part, either because they no longer lived in the UK or 

because they had a diagnosed developmental disorder and a further 16 of those eligible either 

declined to take part or withdrew consent resulting in a final sample of 137 participants (69 

males) (90% of eligible children). Binary logistic regression revealed that while non-returners 

did not differ significantly from returners in age, verbal ability or maternal education, they 

were more likely to be male, OR = 2.58, B = .95, SE = .42, p = .03 (See Table S1 for 

description of eligible and returning participants at Wave1). Although ethnically homogenous 

(94% white), the sample was socio-economically diverse: 36% of the participants’ mothers 

had no educational qualifications or age 16 qualifications only. The mean age of participants 

at Wave 1 was 6.05 years, SD = .35, Range: 5.22 – 6.98. At Wave 2 the mean age of 

participants was 10.81 years, SD = .35, Range: 10.01 – 11.95. The mean testing interval was 

4.76 years, SD = .38, Range: 3.27 – 5.57. Given the age spread in our sample, we controlled 

for age in our analyses. 

Procedures 

At both Wave 1 and 2, participants were tested individually at school by experienced 

graduate researchers using counter-balanced task batteries in which measures of EF 

alternated with measures of ToM (see Table 1 for summary of tasks). At the end of each 

session participants were thanked with a small gift or a book token. Teachers rated 

participants’ social competence via a postal questionnaire. Teacher questionnaires were 

completed for 103 participants at both study waves. There were no differences between 

 

10 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

participants whose teachers did or did not return questionnaires in terms of age or verbal 

ability at Wave 1, gender and maternal education, Nagelkerke R2 = .01, χ2 (4) = 1.08, p = .89. 

Importantly, there were no significant differences in teacher-rated social competence at Wave 

1 between those whose teachers did (M = 44.04, SD = 8.37) and did not return (M = 44.13, 

SD =8.76) questionnaires at Wave 2, t (127) = 0.05, p = 0.96.  

Measures 

 

ToM at Wave 1. In the Object Transfer False-Belief Task (Wimmer & Perner, 1983) 

participants watched while an object was moved from one location to another while a puppet 

was absent. The puppet then searched for the object in the original location. To succeed on 

this task participants needed to both explain the puppet’s behavior and identify the object’s 

actual location (control question). In the Unexpected Contents False-Belief Task (Bartsch & 

Wellman, 1989) participants were shown a cereal box and a plain box and asked where they 

would expect to find cereal. They were then shown that the cereal box was empty but the 

plain box contained cereal. To succeed on this task, participants needed to predict where an 

uninformed puppet would look for cereal and to recall where the cereal really was (control 

question). Scores from these two tasks were significantly correlated, ϕ (135) = .27, p < .001 

and summed to create a 0-2 point ‘Predict/Explain False Belief’ score. 

The Emotion False-Belief Tasks involved two puppet-based stories that included 

either a nice or nasty surprise (Harris et al., 1989). For example, in one story Leo the Lion 

received a nasty surprise when another character replaced the contents of a can of his favorite 

drink (Cola) with a drink he disliked (Juice). In both stories participants were only given test 

questions if they responded correctly to two forced-choice emotion comprehension questions 

(e.g., How does Leo feel when he drinks juice?). Participants were scored as failing these 

 

11 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

items if they did not pass the two forced-choice comprehension questions. Test questions for 

both stories were also presented in a forced-choice format and required the participants to 

predict a character’s false belief (e.g., What does Leo think is in the can, Cola or juice?) and 

recall the actual contents. Participants were also asked to infer an emotion based upon both 

belief and desire information (e.g., How does he feel before he drinks from the can?), and to 

explain their response (e.g., “He’s happy because he thinks there’s Cola in the can”). Finally, 

participants received two comprehension questions about the character’s emotion on learning 

the actual contents of the container and were only credited with success if they passed both 

the relevant false belief prediction and comprehension questions. Thus across the two tasks 

participants’ answered two questions in which they had to attribute a first order false belief. 

Scores on these two trials were correlated, ϕ (135) = .41, p < .001, and were summed 

together. We called this score ‘Predict Other’s False Belief (I)’ (range: 0 – 2). Participants 

also answered two questions in which they had to infer and explain an emotion based on a 

false belief. The scores from these two trials were correlated, ϕ (135) = .47, p < .001, and 

summed to create the ‘Infer/Explain Emotion based on False Belief’ score (range: 0 – 4; that 

is, 1 point for each correct inference and explanation). 

The Second-Order False-Belief Tasks assessed participants’ ability to infer a 

character’s beliefs about another character’s beliefs via two picture book tasks (Sullivan et 

al., 1994). In one story, Peter’s mother wants to surprise him for his birthday by buying him a 

puppy, but telling him she will buy a toy. Unbeknown to her, however, Peter discovers the 

puppy. Participants were first given a forced-choice test question about Peter’s initial false 

belief and a control question about Peter’s actual birthday gift. Following Peter’s discovery 

of the puppy, participants were asked to predict (e.g., Peter’s Granny asks Mum what Peter 

thinks he got for his birthday. What does Mum say?) and explain (e.g., “because Mummy 

 

12 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

doesn’t know that Peter saw the puppy”) Peter’s mother’s second-order false belief and had 

to also pass two further control questions. Participants only succeeded on the first and second 

order false-belief test questions if they also passed the corresponding control questions. 

Scores on the first-order false belief question from each story were correlated, ϕ (135) = .51, 

p < .001, and so were summed together (range: 0 – 2). We called this score ‘Predict Other’s 

False Belief (II)’. Scores on the second-order false belief question from each story were 

correlated, ϕ (135) = .43, p < .001, and so were summed together. We called this final score 

‘Infer/Explain Second-Order False Belief’ (range: 0 – 4). Sample scripts for these ToM tasks 

can be found in Hughes et al. (2000).  

ToM at Wave 2. The Strange Stories Task (Happé, 1994) consisted of five audio-

visual vignettes depicting social situations, each followed by an open-ended question that 

required participants to explain a character’s behavior with reference to his/her mental states. 

One story involved a double bluff, two stories involved deception and two further stories 

involved misunderstandings. Happé’s (1994) scoring scheme was used to code responses 

(For the full text of the Strange Stories task and corresponding marking scheme see: White, 

Hill, Happé & Frith, 2009). Participants received 0, 1 or 2 points for each incorrect, partially 

correct or fully correct response. A random selection of 25% of anonymized transcripts 

showed moderate to strong levels of inter-rater reliability, mean κ = .70, .49 ≤ κ ≤ .87, all ps 

< .01. Responses to each item were summed to create a ‘Strange Stories’ total score.  

In the Triangles Task (For sample items and scoring guidelines see: Castelli, Happé, 

Frith & Frith, 2000) participants watched three short animations that featured two moving 

triangles and were designed to elicit mental state attributions (coaxing, teasing and 

surprising). After each clip, participants were asked to describe what had happened and their 

 

13 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

responses were recorded, transcribed and rated for ascription of: (i) intentionality, with scores 

for each item ranging from 0 (non-deliberate actions) to 5 (deliberate actions with the goal of 

affecting others’ mental states; and (ii) accuracy, scored as 0 (incorrect descriptions), 1 

(imprecise or incomplete descriptions) or 2 (correct descriptions of the story or actions 

presented in the clip). In a random selection of 25% of the anonymised transcripts, 

intentionality ratings for individual items exhibited strong inter-rater reliability, mean ICC = 

.80, range .69 - .90, all ps < .01, as did accuracy ratings, mean κ = .71, .60 ≤ κ ≤ .80, all ps < 

.001. We summed together intentionality and accuracy scores for each item to create a 

‘Triangles’ total score.  

In the Silent Film Task (For test description and sample items see: Devine & Hughes, 

2013) participants were required to explain the behavior of characters in scenarios presented 

in five brief clips from a classic silent comedy. The clips were played once in a fixed order. 

The first clip was accompanied by two questions and the remaining four clips were followed 

by one question each. The responses were scored using the scheme developed by Devine and 

Hughes (2013): participants received 2 points for responses that provided an accurate 

mentalistic explanation of events (e.g., The driver didn’t know that Harold was in the van), 1 

point for responses that refer to the facts but don’t use mentalistic explanations (e.g., The 

driver did not hear Harold) and 0 points for irrelevant or incorrect responses (e.g., The driver 

kidnapped Harold). In a random selection of 25% of the anonymized transcripts individual 

items showed moderate to strong agreement, mean κ = .74, .47 ≤ κ ≤ .93, all ps < .01. Scores 

across each of the 6 questions were summed together to create a ‘Silent Film’ total score. 1 

                                                             
1 Participants also completed the automated Director Task (Dumontheil et al., 2010). This task did not load onto 
the ToM latent factor but instead loaded onto the EF latent factor. In addition this task did not correlate 
significantly with Wave 1 measures of ToM. The results of this task have been omitted but are available from 
the first author.  

 

14 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

EF at Wave 1. Participants completed the Tower of London Task (Shallice, 1982) 

using simplified age-appropriate instructions (Hughes, 1998). This task challenges both 

inhibition (e.g., over-riding the impulse to start moving the balls) and working memory (e.g., 

holding in mind the three rules and the target arrangement). Participants had to move a set of 

three colored balls placed in a starting arrangement on three wooden dowels to each target 

arrangement within a specified number of moves. They were told that (1) only one ball could 

be moved at a time, (2) balls underneath another ball could not be moved and (3) the 

maximum number of balls that each dowel could hold (i.e., 3, 2, 1). Trials were administered 

in a fixed order and consisted of three 2-move problems, three 3-move problems and three 4-

move problems. Participants received 1 point for each perfect solution and 0 points for 

solutions that exceeded the number of permissible moves (possible range: 0 – 9).  

Participants completed the Bead Memory task from the Stanford-Binet Intelligence 

Scale (Thorndike, Hagan & Sattler, 1986) at Wave 1 and Wave 2. On each trial participants 

were shown for 5 seconds an arrangement of beads on a stick that varied in shape (ellipsoids, 

spheres, cones and disks) and color (red, white and blue). They were then given a box of 

beads (with three of each type) and asked to reproduce each arrangement exactly. The task 

was discontinued after 3 failures across 4 trials; raw scores were calculated by subtracting the 

number of failed trials from the highest item attempted. Although initially designed to 

measure short-term visual memory, this task challenges multiple EFs (e.g., participants must 

not touch the beads while the image is displayed, the image is then removed such that they 

must hold it in mind while they select the beads, they must then plan ahead in order to place 

the beads on the stick in the correct sequence). Performance on this task is correlated with 

performance on measures of inhibition and set shifting in childhood (e.g., Hongwanishkul, 

Happaney, Lee & Zelazo, 2005; Hughes & Ensor, 2005).  

 

15 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

The Day/Night Test of conflict inhibition (Gerstadt, Hong & Diamond, 1994) had 12 

trials; on each trial participants were shown a picture of the sun or moon and asked to say 

‘night’ in response to the sun and ‘day’ in response to the moon. Given the clear significant 

negative skew in the distribution for this task, M = 11.12, SD = 1.85, Zskew = - 15.38, p < .001, 

we dichotomized scores on this task using a median split: participants scoring fewer than 12 

trials out of 12 correctly (N = 45) received a score of 0 and those scoring 12 correctly 

received a score of 1. The mean accuracy score for the ‘failing’ group was 9.33, SD = 2.39. 

The Trucks Game tested participants’ cognitive set shifting (Hughes & Ensor, 2005). 

On the first trial of the initial rule-learning phase of this game, the child was shown a picture 

of two trucks on yellow card and asked to guess which truck would win him or her a treat (in 

fact, the child’s choice was always judged as the correct choice and the child was told to 

remember that truck). On the second trial, the child was shown a second pair of trucks and 

asked to select one of the trucks; again this choice was always recorded as correct and the 

child was told to remember that truck too. On the next 6 trials the child was shown either the 

first or second pair of trucks in a pseudo-random order with the spatial position (left or right) 

of each truck counter-balanced. Within each pair the trucks were quite similar, such that 

some children chose the wrong truck by mistake on early trials; they were therefore given 

verbal feedback on each trial and categorized as passing the pre-shift phase if they chose the 

correct truck for at least four out of the final five trials. Next children completed the post-shift 

phase. This time, each pair of trucks was presented on a green card and the child was told to 

select the other (previously non-rewarded) truck in order to win a treat. There were 8 post-

shift trials and success was indexed by correct choices on at least 4 of the last 5 trials. We 

awarded a score of 1 to participants passing both phases (N = 121) and 0 (N = 16) to those 

who did not.  

 

16 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

EF at Wave 2. To measure conflict inhibition, participants completed the Arrows 

Task (Davidson et al. 2006). In this task participants viewed one of four images of a purple 

arrow on a white screen. The arrow pointed either directly downward or diagonally on either 

the left- or right-hand side of the screen. During congruent (control) trials, the arrow pointed 

directly downward and participants had to press the button on the same side as where the 

arrow appeared. During incongruent (test) trials, the arrow pointed diagonally and 

participants had to press the button on the opposite side to where the arrow appeared. Before 

beginning, participants received detailed instructions and practice items. Each 750ms trial 

was preceded by a 500ms interval in which a 16-point font black crosshair was displayed 

against a white background. Participants had to respond with a button press within the 750ms 

trial period to each of 12 control trials and 12 test trials administered in a random order. 

Efficiency scores were based on the total number of correct incongruent trials divided by the 

total time taken on incongruent trials. In line with previous studies (Davidson et al., 2006) 

anticipatory responses of < 200ms and missed responses were recorded as errors. 

The Smiling Faces Task (Huizinga et al., 2006) is an index of set shifting. During this 

task participants had to respond to one of four cartoon faces (i.e., a happy boy, a happy girl, a 

sad boy and a sad girl) displayed in one of four quadrants on a screen. In single task trials 

participants were asked to indicate whether a face was (1) a boy or a girl if it appeared in the 

top two quadrants or (2) happy or sad if it appeared in the bottom two quadrants. During 

alternating trials, participants had to integrate both rules. Trials were administered in four 

blocks in a fixed order: one set of 16 single task trials (boy or a girl); another one set of 16 

single task trials (happy or sad); and two sets of 16 alternating trials. Each trial lasted 3500ms 

during which time participants had to respond with a button press. The trials were preceded 

by a 500ms interval in which a 16-point font black crosshair was displayed in the center of 

 

17 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

the screen on a white background. Trials were presented in a random order within each block. 

We calculated efficiency scores by dividing the total number of correct alternating trials by 

the total time taken on alternating trials.  

Verbal Ability. We used the British Picture Vocabulary Scale (BPVS) (Dunn, Dunn, 

Whetton & Burley, 1997) to measure verbal ability at both waves. On each item of this 

receptive vocabulary task (suitable for children aged 3- to 16 years) participants were asked 

to pick one picture from a set of four that matched a word read aloud by the examiner. We 

subtracted the number of errors from the item number corresponding to the last number in the 

participant’s ceiling set (that is, sets containing 8 or more errors) to calculate raw scores.  

Social Competence at School. At both study waves teachers completed the 30-item 

Social Skills Rating System (SRSS) (Gresham & Elliot, 1990). The items contain examples of 

behavior associated with cooperation, peer relations, adherence to social conventions, 

assertion, and self-control in social situations at school. Teachers rated the frequency of each 

behavior on a 0 /1 /2-point scale (i.e., Never, Sometimes, Very Often). Total scores therefore 

ranged from 0 to 60 (Wave 1 α = .90; Wave 2 α = .92).  

Results 

Analytic Strategy 

Latent variable and structural equation modelling were undertaken using MPlus 

Version 7 (Muthèn & Muthèn, 2012). To assess the coherence of our diverse tests of ToM 

and EF we conducted a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), using a mean- and variance-

adjusted weighted least squares estimator to generate model parameters when task scores 

were categorical (see Table 1) and full information maximum likelihood estimation when the 

 

18 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

data were continuous and normally distributed (so that all cases with data in Wave 1 could be 

included in both sets of analyses). To examine longitudinal associations in our data, we used 

structural equation modelling. We used four primary criteria to assess the acceptability of our 

measurement and structural models: a non-significant χ2 test of model fit, Comparative Fit 

Index (CFI) > .95, Tucker Lewis Index (TLI) > .95 and Root Mean Square Error of 

Approximation (RMSEA) < .08 (Brown, 2006). 

To reduce the number of parameters in our structural equation models while 

capitalizing on the benefits of using latent factors, we used the Wave 1 and Wave 2 factor 

scores in the longitudinal models (see Data Reduction). In each of the longitudinal models we 

allowed the predictor variables to inter-correlate. Consistent with previous studies on the 

longitudinal links between EF and ToM (e.g., Hughes & Ensor, 2007), we sought to examine 

the independent association between the Wave 1 independent variable and the Wave 2 

dependent variable controlling for Wave 1 scores on the dependent variable, maternal 

education and Wave 1 verbal ability. We adopted a similar approach when examining the 

longitudinal links between ToM, EF and teacher-rated social competence.  

For the EF and ToM variables at Wave 1 and Wave 2, missing data did not exceed 

1% on any variable in the dataset. No participant had missing data for all test variables. Note 

that there were no ‘gateway’ items in our data. That is, if a participant failed a control 

question, the participant received a score of ‘0’ for that item. There were no missing values 

on any of the background variables (i.e., gender, age, verbal ability, maternal education). For 

teacher-rated social competence, 129 teachers provided ratings at Wave 1 and 103 teachers 

provided ratings at Wave 2. To avoid loss of data, missing values were estimated in Mplus 

using either maximum likelihood or mean- and variance- weighted least squares depending 

 

19 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

on the model estimator (Muthèn & Muthèn, 2010). Mplus provides reliable estimates of 

missing values and latent variable factor scores based on participants’ scores on other 

variables in the model (Asparouhov & Muthèn, 2010a).   

Data Reduction 

Tables 2 and 3 show the descriptive statistics (and correlations) for ToM and EF 

scores respectively. The mean score on the teacher-rated SRSS was 44.04, SD = 8.37, Range: 

18 – 60 at Wave 1 and 42.72, SD = 9.18, Range: 20 – 60 at Wave 2. In line with previous 

studies of individual differences in EF using confirmatory factor analysis, zero-order 

correlations between the EF tasks at both time points were weak to moderate in strength (e.g., 

Miyake et al., 2000). Likewise the inter-correlations between the ToM scores at both time 

points were also weak to moderate in strength. CFA can be used in such situations to extract 

a ‘pure’ measure of each construct by statistically isolating the shared variance between the 

diverse measures of each construct from the task-specific variance and measurement error 

(Brown, 2006; Miyake et al., 2000).  

For the Wave 1 data, using CFA, we specified two measurement models that 

replicated the latent factors for ToM and EF reported elsewhere in the literature (Hughes, 

Ensor & Marks, 2011; Hughes & Ensor, 2011). Standardized factor loadings and residuals for 

each of these models are depicted in Figure 1 panels A and B. First we specified a model in 

which each of the false-belief scores loaded onto a single ToM latent factor. We set the 

metric of the latent variable by fixing the loading of the marker indicator (i.e., 

Predict/Explain False Belief) to 1 (Kline, 2011). This model provided an excellent fit to the 

data, χ2 (4) = 2.71, p = .61, CFI = 1.00, TLI = 1.00, RMSEA = 0. The latent factor exhibited 

significant variance, Unstandardized Est. = 0.21, p = .04. Next we specified a single factor 

 

20 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

model in which each of the EF task scores loaded onto a single latent factor. Once again we 

set the metric of the latent variable by fixing the loading of the marker indicator (i.e., Tower 

of London) to 1. The model provided an excellent fit to the Wave 1 EF data, χ2 (2) = 1.91, p 

= .38, CFI = 1.00, TLI = 1.01, RMSEA = 0. The latent factor exhibited significant variance, 

Unstandardized Est. = .09, p = .01.  

Next we specified two latent factor models to measure individual differences in ToM 

and EF at Wave 2. The standardized factor loadings and residuals for each of these models 

are depicted in Figure 1 panels C and D. These models were ‘just-identified’ since there was 

an equal number of model parameters and variances/covariances in the sample matrix 

(Brown, 2006). While model fit estimates cannot be calculated for just-identified models 

because there are 0 degrees of freedom, parameter estimates can be still calculated and 

interpreted (Brown, 2006). In the first model each of the ToM scores loaded onto a single 

ToM latent factor. We set the metric of this latent factor by fixing the loading of the Strange 

Stories task to 1. This latent factor exhibited significant variance, Unstandardized Est. = 2.82, 

p < .05. In the second model each of the EF measures loaded onto a single EF latent factor. 

We set the metric of this latent factor by fixing the Bead Memory task to 1. This latent factor 

showed significant variance, Unstandardized Est. = 3.88, p < .05.  

We created factor scores for each of the latent variables for ToM and EF by imputing 

plausible values (i.e., a distribution of factor scores for each participant) for each latent 

variable using Bayesian estimation in Mplus (Asparouhov & Muthèn, 2010b). Standard factor 

scores calculated using the regression method do not provide reliable estimates of true scores 

when used as dependent variables in regression models (Skrondal & Laake, 2001). Plausible 

values, however, can be used to build models for secondary analysis and provide reliable 

 

21 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

estimates of the true scores on latent factors (Asparouhov & Muthèn, 2010b). We used 

plausible values based on multiple imputations in each of the longitudinal structural equation 

models reported below. 

To examine the convergent validity of Wave 2 ToM measures we assessed the 

correlation between the scores from the ToM latent factor from Wave 1 and performance on 

each of the measures of ToM at Wave 2. Performance on the ToM latent factor at Wave 1 

was correlated with performance on the Strange Stories, r (135) = .41, p < .001, 90% CI [.29, 

.52], the Triangle Task, r (135) = .27, p < .01, 90% CI [.14, .40] and the Silent Films Task, r 

(135) = .35, p < .001, 90% CI [.23, .45]. When concurrent age and Wave 2 verbal ability 

were accounted for, the Strange Stories, pr (133) = .27, p < .01, 90% CI [.16, .39], Triangles 

Task, pr (133) = .22, p < .05, 90% CI [.08, .36], and Silent Film Task, pr (133) = .25, p < .01, 

90% CI [.12, .40] remained correlated with Wave 1 ToM.  

ToM and EF in Middle Childhood 

Our first aim was to examine the associations between EF and ToM within and across 

each wave of the study. As shown in Table 4, there were moderate and significant 

correlations within and across waves. Although attenuated, at both time-points concurrent 

associations between ToM and EF remained significant even when concurrent verbal ability 

and age were taken into account. To assess the developmental relations between these two 

constructs across middle childhood we specified a longitudinal structural equation model (see 

Figure 2 for path diagram with standardized estimates and Table S2 for unstandardized 

parameter estimates). We regressed ToM scores at Wave 2 onto ToM scores at Wave 1, EF 

scores at Wave 1, verbal ability at Wave 1 and maternal education (i.e., No qualifications or 

GCSE only = 0; A-Level or Degree = 1). We also regressed EF scores at Wave 2 onto EF 

 

22 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

scores at Wave 1, ToM scores at Wave 1, verbal ability at Wave 1 and maternal education. 

We permitted each of the variables at Wave 1 and Wave 2 to inter-correlate. This cross-

lagged model fit the data well, χ2 (3) = 2.84, p = .42, CFI = 1.00, TLI = 1.00, RMSEA = 0. 

As shown in Figure 2 (and Table S2), there was weak but significant stability in individual 

differences in EF and ToM across middle childhood. However, there were no significant 

cross-lagged associations between EF and ToM across middle childhood.  

We performed a post-hoc power analysis using Monte Carlo simulation in Mplus 7. 

Using the means and variances from each variable in our sample, we tested whether a sample 

size of 137 participants would be sufficient to detect small-to-medium effects in the cross-

lagged paths of the model described above. We specified the same cross-lagged model but 

calculated the unstandardized regression co-effecients for the two cross-lagged paths in our 

model if the correlation was .30. According to Muthèn and Muthèn (2002) sample sizes 

should be large enough to provide unbiased parameter estimates, unbiased standard errors (so 

that the significance of effects are not over- or under-estimated), sufficient coverage (that is, 

the proportion of replications for which the 95%CI contains the population value should be ≥ 

.91) and sufficient power (that is, the proportion of replications for which the null hypothesis 

of no relationship is rejected should be ≥ .80). Focusing on the two cross-lagged model 

parameters, we assessed four key features, recommended by Muthèn and Muthèn (2002), to 

determine whether the sample size of 137 was sufficient: parameter bias < 10%; standard 

error bias < 5%; coverage between .91 and .98; power close to .80. Our results revealed that 

both paths exhibited low levels of parameter bias (both < 1%) and low levels of standard 

error bias (both <5%). Coverage for both parameters was .94 and the power to detect medium 

effects for both parameters was close to .80 (.78 and .84 respectively). Together these results 

suggest that a sample of 137 participants was sufficient to detect medium effects.  

 

23 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

ToM, EF and Social Competence in Middle Childhood 

Our second aim was to assess the links between ToM, EF and teacher-rated social 

competence at school. Note that some teachers provided questionnaires for more than one 

study participant. Specifically, 13 teachers completed questionnaires on 2 participants, 3 

teachers on 3 participants, 1 teacher on 4 participants, 1 teacher on 5 participants and 1 

teacher on 6 participants. The remaining questionnaires were completed independently. 

Given that the data were clustered and so variance in social competence ratings could be 

attributable to both child-level variation and teacher-level variation, we calculated an intra-

class correlation (ICC) to determine the proportion of total variance in social competence 

ratings that was due to between-teacher variance (Byrne, 2012; Muthèn, 1997). The ICC for 

the social competence rating was .11 indicating that between-teacher variance was minimal 

(Byrne, 2012). We therefore assessed the longitudinal relations between ToM, EF and social 

competence across middle childhood using a single-level longitudinal structural equation 

model (See Figure 3 for path diagram with standardized estimates and Table S3 for 

unstandardized parameter estimates). Specifically, Wave 2 ToM scores were regressed onto 

Wave 1 ToM scores, Wave 1 EF scores, Wave 1 teacher-rated social competence scores, 

Wave 1 verbal ability, gender (i.e., Male = 0; Female = 1) and maternal education. Wave 2 

teacher-rated social competence scores were regressed onto Wave 1 teacher-rated social 

competence scores, Wave 1 ToM scores, Wave 1 EF scores, Wave 1 verbal ability, maternal 

education, and gender. Finally Wave 2 EF scores were regressed onto Wave 1 EF scores, 

Wave 1 ToM scores, Wave 1 teacher-rated social competence scores, Wave 1 verbal ability, 

gender and maternal education. Each of the variables at Wave 1 and Wave 2 were permitted 

to inter-correlate with other concurrent measures. This cross-lagged model provided an 

excellent fit to the data, χ2 (5) = 3.37, p = .64, CFI = 1.00, TLI = 1.00, RMSEA = 0.01. 

 

24 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Inspection of this model revealed that individual differences in ToM, EF and teacher-rated 

social competence exhibited modest but significant relative stability across middle childhood 

(see Figure 3). Importantly, Wave 1 ToM scores showed a weak but significant independent 

association with Wave2 teacher-rated social competence at school. In contrast, Wave 1 

teacher-rated social competence was unrelated to Wave 2 ToM scores. Moreover there were 

no cross-lagged associations between EF scores and teacher-rated social competence scores. 

To confirm our findings we re-ran this model using a multi-level framework clustering the 

social competence data by teacher. The model provided an excellent fit to the data, χ2 (6) = 

3.37, p = .76, CFI = 1.00, TLI = 1.00, RMSEA = 0.01 and the pattern of results remained 

unchanged. 

We performed a Monte Carlo simulation to examine whether the sample size of 137 

provided sufficient power to detect medium effects (r = .30) on each of the six cross-lagged 

paths in the model. As before we used the means and variances for each variable from our 

sample and specified a model identical to that described above. In addition we specified that 

data on the teacher-rated social competence measure at both time points would be missing for 

approximately 25% of the sample. For each of the 6 cross-lagged paths there were low levels 

of parameter bias (0.11 – 1.79%) and acceptable levels of standard error bias (2.07% - 

4.88%). The coverage ranged from .93 to .94 and power estimates ranged from .77 to .85. 

These findings suggest that the sample size provided sufficient power to detect small to 

medium effects in the specified model. 

Discussion  

ToM and EF in Middle Childhood 

 

25 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

 

Our study revealed that, despite the differences in the ToM tasks used at ages 6 and 

10, both time-points showed similarly moderate concurrent associations between individual 

differences in ToM and EF that echoed the findings from a meta-analysis of preschool data 

(Devine & Hughes, 2014). In contrast, there were no significant cross-lagged associations 

between these two constructs across the 4-year interval between study time-points. This lack 

of longitudinal association is open to at least three possible explanations.  

First, aspects of the study design might have masked any longitudinal effects. 

Specifically, the extended measurement interval (which exceeded that of all previous 

longitudinal studies of ToM and EF) might have attenuated the association between 

individual differences in ToM and EF. In addition some of our measures of EF at Wave 1 

may not have been sufficiently challenging for the participants as indicated by evidence of 

ceiling effects on the Day/Night Task (67% at ceiling) and the Trucks Game (88% at ceiling). 

The other two EF tasks at Wave 1 were developmentally appropriate and exhibited normal 

distributions. That said it is still possible that ceiling effects in two of our EF measures might 

have attenuated any associations between EF and ToM. Finally, although the post-hoc power 

analyses revealed that there was a sufficiently large sample size to detect medium cross-

lagged effects, it is still possible that our sample was not large enough to detect small cross-

lagged effects. Larger samples would be needed to detect such effects. 

 The second possible explanation is that the presence of concurrent but not 

longitudinal associations between EF and ToM might indicate that these two constructs 

develop in tandem across middle childhood. Consequently, the observed asymmetry in the 

longitudinal links between EF and ToM in early childhood (Devine & Hughes, 2014) might 

disappear while concurrent associations might remain. The third possibility is that EF is 

 

26 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

related to ToM performance in middle childhood but may not drive any further 

developmental change in ToM in this period. If so, this would suggest a developmental shift 

in the nature of the relation between these two constructs from emergence (in the preschool 

years) to expression (in middle childhood).  

Note, however, that the lack of developmental links between ToM and EF in middle 

childhood does not mean that the concurrent associations between these constructs are trivial. 

Although gains in EF across middle childhood may have no implication for the continued 

growth of ToM across this period, EF might still play an important role in the process of 

reading others’ minds. Concurrent correlations between ToM and EF in middle childhood 

and beyond indicate that EF is an integral component of ToM beyond the preschool years. As 

Apperly (2011) has proposed, EF may contribute to many of the processes involved in 

attributing mental states to others, including inferring what others think, temporarily storing 

this information in mind and using this information to explain and predict others’ behavior. 

Given that there are at least three potential explanations for our findings, our study 

signals the need for further longitudinal research on the links between EF and ToM in middle 

childhood and more specifically the need for repeated-measures designs over shorter 

measurement intervals. The extended temporal span of the current study precluded us from 

using the same measures of ToM and EF at both time points in order to examine directly 

whether change in one construct results in change in the other. In recent years a wide range 

of tasks suitable for measuring ToM (and indeed EF) across middle childhood has become 

available. Designs incorporating multiple time points in middle childhood will reveal whether 

changes in EF are related to growth in ToM and vice versa. Short-term repeated-measures 

studies could be used to test whether EF is implicated in more proximal developmental 

 

27 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

changes in ToM in middle childhood. Finally, looking beyond longitudinal associations 

between EF and ToM, the use of tasks designed to isolate particular components of reasoning 

about others’ mental states (e.g., Apperly, Back, Samson & France, 2008) may lead to greater 

insights into the role of EF in the expression or use of ToM beyond the preschool years.  

ToM, EF and Social Competence in Middle Childhood 

Our moderate within-time correlations between ToM and teachers’ ratings of social 

competence at ages 6 and 10 complement previously reported associations between 

individual differences in ToM and self- and peer-reported social competence in middle 

childhood (e.g., Banerjee et al., 2011; Devine & Hughes, 2013). Teachers are well placed to 

provide more objective information about children’s social behavior relative to others of a 

similar age (e.g., Stone, Otten, Engels, Vermulst & Janssens, 2010) and the convergence of 

findings from different sources supports the relevance of ToM to children’s social lives in 

middle childhood. Taken together with existing peer-rated and self-reported data, our 

findings suggest that individual differences in ToM in middle childhood might be important 

for successful social interaction and behavior at school. The unidirectional nature of the 

association between early ToM and later social competence in middle childhood supports the 

claim that individual differences in ToM are socially meaningful (e.g., Astington, 2003) but 

contrasts with reports of reciprocal relations between ToM and social competence across a 1-

year measurement interval (e.g., Banerjee et al. 2011). An extended interval of time might be 

required to detect the direction of the relation between ToM and social competence. It is also 

possible that peer acceptance might provide quite a distinct measure of social competence 

than teachers’ ratings of social behavior in the classroom.  

 

28 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

In contrast, we found only weak concurrent correlations and no evidence of cross-

lagged associations between EF and social competence between the ages of 6 and 10. Studies 

have reported mixed findings about the links between performance on measures of EF and 

teacher- or parent-rated social competence in early and middle childhood. While there appear 

to be weak concurrent associations between EF and social competence in early childhood 

(e.g., Rhoades, Greenberg & Domitrovich, 2009), these findings have not been supported by 

longitudinal studies (e.g. Hughes & Ensor, 2011; Razza & Blair, 2009). Moreover, in a recent 

study by Harms, Zayas, Meltzoff and Carlson (2014), individual differences in EF at age 8 

and 12 were unrelated to teachers’ ratings of children’s social competence at age 12. That 

said, there is a growing body of evidence to suggest that low levels of EF are related to 

problem behaviors (e.g., Espy, Sheffield, Wiebe, Clark & Moehr, 2011) and to academic 

underachievement (e.g. McClelland, Cameron, Connor, Farris, Jewkes & Morrison, 2007). It 

appears that while EF and ToM are correlated in early and middle childhood, individual 

differences in these abilities contribute to different developmental outcomes. Further 

longitudinal research will be needed to test this hypothesis. 

Our findings extend the current literature both by documenting the developmental 

reach of early individual differences in ToM and by demonstrating the independence of 

longitudinal links between ToM and later social competence at school from other factors 

(e.g., verbal ability, maternal education and EF). This second point suggests that the 

determinants of social competence may differ in early and middle childhood. In contrast with 

findings from the preschool years (e.g., Astington, 2003), verbal ability was unrelated to 

teacher’s ratings of social competence at age 10. Given the inconsistent findings about the 

links between ToM and different aspects of social competence in the early years, our findings 

suggest that individual differences in ToM become more salient in middle childhood. That 

 

29 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

said, our reliance on a single measure of verbal ability (and indeed social competence) 

precludes firm conclusions about the relations between language and social competence. 

 

Likewise, our findings do not provide unqualified support for the notion that ToM is 

vital for children’s social lives. The data indicate that while ToM clearly plays a part in 

children’s social competence at school in middle childhood, it is by no means a sufficient 

explanation (Astington, 2003). Consistent with previous findings about the links between 

ToM and social competence in middle childhood, the longitudinal association reported here, 

although independent and significant, was small in magnitude. Together, these findings 

highlight the importance of other unmeasured influences on children’s social competence. 

Moreover the data reported here are correlational in nature. Training studies would provide 

more robust evidence for claims regarding the developmental relations between ToM and 

social competence both in the preschool years and in middle childhood. In one recent study 

of 9- and 10-year-old children, Lecce, Bianco, Devine, Hughes and Banerjee (2014) found 

that children in a 2-week conversation-based ToM training program showed greater gains in 

performance on the Strange Stories task than children assigned to an active control group (in 

which children discussed physical events in short vignettes). Further work is needed to 

establish whether the benefits of training for ToM performance result in gains in children’s 

social competence in school and other settings.  

Implications for Understanding Individual Differences in ToM 

This study showed, for the first time, that performance on classic false-belief tasks 

predicted later performance on a battery of ‘advanced’ ToM tasks, such that individual 

differences in ToM exhibited weak to moderate stability from ages 6 to 10. Individual 

differences in ToM have been conceptualized in at least two ways. Some researchers have 

 

30 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

interpreted individual differences in children’s ToM task performance as either 

developmental delays or precocities (e.g., Slaughter & Repacholi, 2003; Wellman, Cross & 

Watson, 2001). Underlying this ‘developmental lag’ perspective is the assumption that 

children who perform poorly on false-belief task batteries will eventually ‘catch up’ with 

their peers with no real developmental consequences (Bartsch & Estes, 1996). In contrast, 

others have argued that variation in the age at which children obtain an understanding of 

mental-state concepts might predict later variation in ToM performance, that is, the ease 

and/or accuracy with which individuals attribute mental states to others (Apperly, 2012). 

Both the stability of individual differences in ToM across the 4-year interval in this study and 

the predictive association between early ToM and later teacher-rated social competence 

support this ‘genuine variation’ model.  

 

Second, our longitudinal findings suggest that variation in cognitive skills such as 

verbal ability and EF do not fully explain individual differences in ToM performance in 

middle childhood. The stability of individual differences in cognitive abilities might reflect 

stability in either genetic or environmental influence (Tucker-Drob & Briley, 2014). Previous 

cross-sectional twin studies of ToM in 5-year-olds (Hughes et al., 2005) and 9-year-olds 

(Ronald et al., 2006) demonstrate very little genetic influence on individual differences in 

ToM but do not rule out the possibility of genetic influence on the stability of individual 

differences in ToM across middle childhood and beyond. Our study findings are also silent 

on this issue as the two time-points both fell within a developmental period when British 

children attend primary school and so typically remain with the same group of classmates. 

Recent longitudinal work in middle childhood suggests that peer acceptance predicts later 

individual differences in ToM (Banerjee et al., 2011). Therefore, if the environmental 

 

31 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

account of stability is correct, one might predict a decrease in the longitudinal stability of 

ToM across the transition to secondary school when children enter a new social milieu.  

 

Earlier we noted that recent studies have demonstrated age-related improvements in 

performance on a range of ‘advanced’ ToM tasks across middle childhood. Researchers must 

now attempt to identify what factors might underpin the continued growth of the ability to 

reason about others’ mental states in this developmental period. Social factors may have a 

main effect on the development of ToM beyond the preschool years. To date research on 

ToM, both in the preschool years and beyond, has focused on social or cognitive correlates in 

isolation. If cognitive factors, such as EF, do not exert a main effect on the development of 

ToM across middle childhood, these factors could nonetheless act as moderators of social 

influences. Enhanced EF, for example, might enable children to better attend to and reflect 

upon relevant social experiences (Hughes & Devine, 2015).  

For more than three decades, research on ToM has focused predominantly on the 

preschool years. In this paper we have attempted to extend the traditional developmental 

scope of ToM research by examining the links between ToM, EF and social competence in 

middle childhood. Our findings revealed concurrent but not longitudinal associations between 

individual differences in ToM and EF across a four-year period in middle childhood. In 

addition, our findings showed both concurrent and longitudinal correlations between 

individual differences in ToM and children’s social competence at school. These findings 

both provide an opportunity to re-evaluate existing theories of ToM and suggest promising 

future avenues for future research on individual differences in ToM in middle childhood.  

 

32 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Table 1. Summary of Key Measures at Wave 1 and Wave 2 

Construct  Task 

Wave  Ability Assessed 

ToM 

Object Transfer & 
Unexpected Contents  

 

 

 

 

 

Emotion False-Belief Task 
Puppet Stories 

Second-Order False-Belief 
Task 

Strange Stories Task 

Triangles Task 

Silent Film Task 

1 

1 

1 

2 

2 

2 

Scale 

Categorical 

Predict and explain a character’s behavior with reference to false 
beliefs. 

Attribute a false belief to a character. Infer and explain a character’s 
emotion based on his/her false beliefs. 

Categorical 

Attribute a false belief to a character. Infer and explain a character’s 
emotion based on his/her false beliefs. 

Categorical 

Explain a character’s behavior with reference to mental states across 
five short text-based vignettes. 

Continuous 

Attribute mental states to explain the actions of two animated 
triangles. 

Continuous 

Explain a character’s behavior with reference to mental states across 
five clips from a silent film.  

Continuous 

EF 

Tower of London  

1  

Planning, working memory, inhibition 

 

 

 

 

 

Bead Memory Task  

1 & 2  Working memory, inhibition  

Day/Night Task 

Trucks Game 

Arrows Task 

Faces Task 

1 

1 

2 

2 

Inhibition 

Set shifting 

Inhibition 

Set shifting 

Verbal 

BPVS  

1 & 2  Receptive vocabulary 

 

33 

Continuous 

Continuous 

Categorical 

Categorical 

Continuous 

Continuous 

Continuous 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics and Correlations for Theory of Mind Tasks 

 

Task 

Wave 1 

Predict/Explain False Belief 

1 

- 

2 

3 

4 

5 

.26** 

.20* 

.24** 

.24** 

Predict False Belief (I) 

.24** 

- 

.25** 

.51** 

.25** 

Predict False Belief (II) 

.14 

.17* 

- 

.37** 

.79** 

Infer/Explain Emotion based on 
False Belief 

Infer/Explain Second-Order 
False Belief  

.17* 

.46** 

.26** 

- 

.40** 

.18* 

.14 

.75** 

.25** 

- 

Strange Stories 

Triangles Task 

Silent Film Task 

 

Mean 

SD 

Range 

.10 

.07 

.12 

 

1.50 

0.66 

.20* 

.24** 

.20* 

.26** 

.12 

.10 

 

1.84 

0.46 

.03 

.29** 

.03 

.17* 

.12 

.20* 

 

1.09 

0.86 

 

2.90 

1.53 

 

1.50 

1.59 

0 – 2 

0 – 2 

0 – 2 

0 – 4 

0 – 4 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Wave 2 

7 

.10 

.16 

.06 

6 

.18* 

.27** 

.35** 

8 

.14 

.17* 

.25** 

.33** 

.32** 

.24** 

.38** 

.09 

.30** 

- 

.34** 

.31** 

.24** 

- 

.21* 

.22** 

.17* 

 

6.39 

2.39 

 

12 

3.97 

- 

 

7.66 

2.11 

1 – 10 

3 - 19 

1 – 12 

Note. **p < .01. *p < .05. Concurrent partial correlations controlling for verbal ability and age are presented below the diagonal. 
Longitudinal partial correlations control for earlier verbal ability and concurrent age. 

 

 

34 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Table 3. Descriptive Statistics and Correlations for Executive Function Tasks.  

 

 

Wave 1 

 

Wave 2 

Tower of London 

Bead Memory (Wave 1) 

Day/Night Task (Pass/Fail) 

Trucks Game (Pass/Fail) 

1 

- 

.12 

.29** 

.27** 

- 

.10 

.01 

Bead Memory (Wave 2) 

.15 

.33** 

Smiling Faces Efficiency (Test) (/s) 

.25** 

.17* 

Arrows Task Efficiency (Test) (/s) 

.31** 

.16 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

 

 

 

 

 

Mean 

SD 

Range 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

.26** 

.27** 

.26** 

.17* 

.10 

- 

.24** 

.22** 

.04 

.03 

.13 

 

0.67 

0.47 

- 

.01 

.13 

.05 

 

0.88 

0.32 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

.27** 

.42** 

.06 

.09 

- 

.19* 

.17* 

 

25.84 

3.42 

.32** 

.33** 

.03 

.17* 

.38** 

- 

.22** 

 

0.48 

0.12 

.37** 

.25** 

.16 

.05 

.30** 

.35** 

- 

 

0.68 

0.46 

18 – 36 

.16 - .79 

0 – 1.86 

 

5.94 

2.01 

 

14.96 

4.03 

0 – 9 

7 - 25 

0 – 1 

0 – 1 

Note. **p < .01. *p < .05. Concurrent partial correlations controlling for verbal ability and age are presented below the diagonal. 
Longitudinal partial correlations control for earlier verbal ability and concurrent age. 

 

 

 

35 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

 

Table 4. Concurrent and Longitudinal Correlations Between Theory of Mind, Executive Function, Verbal Ability and Social Competence. 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

.44** 

.32** 

 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

 

 

 

 

 

Variable 

ToM (Wave 1) 

EF (Wave 1) 

1 

- 

.32** 

Teacher-Rated Social Competence (Wave 1) 

.27** 

ToM (Wave 2) 

EF (Wave 2) 

.35** 

.18* 

Teacher-Rated Social Competence (Wave 2) 

.32** 

 

Concurrent Age 

Concurrent Verbal Ability 

Maternal Education 

Gender 

 

.19* 

.53** 

.25** 

-.05 

.29** 

.32** 

- 

.07 

.10 

.25** 

.17+ 

 

.36** 

.36** 

.28** 

-.08 

.16 

- 

-.01 

.05 

 

.17+ 

.15 

.05 

.09 

.47** 

.34** 

.17+ 

- 

.17* 

 

.12 

.54** 

.40** 

.35** 

.38** 

.12 

.41** 

- 

.14 

 

.20* 

.57** 

.37** 

.34** 

.18+ 

.31** 

.29** 

.12 

- 

 

-.08 

.12 

.18+ 

-.10 

-.25** 

.30** 

 Note. **p < .01. *p < .05. +p < .10. Partial correlations are presented below the diagonal. Concurrent partial correlations control for 

verbal ability and age. Longitudinal partial correlations control for final age, earlier verbal ability and, for cross-lagged correlations, 

earlier scores on the dependent variable. N involving correlations for Teacher-Rated Social Competence at Wave 1 and Wave 2 = 103.  

 

36 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

 

A 

C 

B 

 

D 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1. Standardized Estimates for Measurement Models for ToM and EF Latent 
Factors at Wave 1 and Wave 2. 

Note. **p < .01. ToM = Theory of Mind. EF = Executive Function. W1 = Wave 1. 
W2 = Wave 2. Explain = Predict/Explain False Belief. Predict(1) = Predict False 
Belief I. Predict(2) = Predict False Belief II. Emotion = Infer/Explain Emotion False 
Belief. Second = Infer/Explain Second Order False Belief. ToL = Tower of London. 
DN = Day Night Task.  

 

 

 

 

37 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Figure 2. Path Diagram Depicting Longitudinal Relations Between Theory of Mind and Executive Function. 
Note. **p < .01. *p < .05. +p < .10. Paths with p > .05 are shown in grey. See Table S2 for unstandardized parameter estimates and standard 
errors for all parameters in the model. ToM = Theory of Mind, EF = Executive Function, BPVS = Verbal Ability, SES = Maternal Education, 1 
= Wave 1, 2 = Wave 2. 
 

 

 

38 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Figure 2. Path Diagram Depicting Longitudinal Relations Between Theory of Mind, Executive Function and Social Competence. 
Note. **p < .01. *p < .05. +p < .10. Paths with p > .05 are shown in grey. For clarity, covariances between predictor variables are not depicted. 
See Table S3 for unstandardized parameter estimates and standard errors for all parameters in the model. ToM = Theory of Mind, EF = 
Executive Function, SC = Teacher-Rated Social Competence, BPVS = Verbal Ability, SES = Maternal Education, 1 = Wave 1, 2 = Wave 2. 

 

 

39 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

References 

Apperly, I. A. (2011). Mindreaders: The Cognitive Basis of “Theory of Mind.” Hove: 

Psychology Press. 

Apperly, I. A. (2012). What is theory of mind? Concepts, cognitive processes and 

individual differences. Quarterly Journal Of Experimental Psychology, 65, 825-

839. 

Apperly, I. A., Back, E., Samson, D., & France, L. (2008). The cost of thinking about 

false beliefs: Evidence from adults’ performance on a non-inferential theory of 

mind task. Cognition, 106, 1093 - 1108. 

Apperly, I. A., Samson, D., & Humphreys, G. W. (2009). Studies of adults can inform 

accounts of theory of mind development. Developmental Psychology, 45, 190 -

201.  

Apperly, I.A., Warren, F., Andrews, B.J., Grant, J. & Todd, S. (2011). Developmental 

continuity in theory of mind: Speed and accuracy of belief-desire reasoning in 

children and adults. Child Development, 82, 1691 – 1703.  

Astington, J. W. (2003). Sometimes necessary, never sufficient: False-belief 

understanding and social competence. In B. Repacholi & V. Slaughter (Eds.), 

Individual Differences in Theory of Mind. (pp. 13 - 38). Hove, UK: Psychology 

Press. 

Asparouhov, T. & Muthèn, B.O. (2010a). Weighted least squares estimation with 

missing data. Mplus Technical Appendix. Los Angeles, CA: Muthèn and Muthèn. 

Asparouhov, T. & Muthèn, B.O. (2010b). Plausible values for latent variables using 

Mplus. Mplus Technical Appendix. Los Angeles, CA: Muthèn and Muthèn. 

Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., & He, Z. (2010). False belief understanding in infants. 

Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14, 110-8.  

 

40 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Banerjee, R., Watling, D., & Caputi, M. (2011). Peer relations and understanding of 

faux pas: Longitudinal evidence for bidirectional associations. Child Development, 

82, 1887 - 1905. 

Bartsch, K., & Estes, D. (1996). Individual differences in children’s developing 

theory of mind and implications for metacognition. Learning and Individual 

Differences, 8, 281-304. 

Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. M. (1989). Young children’s attribution of action to 

beliefs and desires. Child Development, 60, 946 - 964. 

Brown, T. A. (2006). Confirmatory Factor Analysis for Applied Research. London: 

The Guilford Press. 

Byrne, B.A. (2012). Structural Equation Modelling with Mplus. New York: 

Routledge. 

Carlson, S. M., Zelazo, P. D., & Faja, S. (2013). Executive Function. In P.D Zelazo 

(Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Developmental Psychology Volume 1: Body and 

Mind. (pp. 706 - 743). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 

Carruthers, P. (1996). Autism as mindblindness: An elaboration and partial defence. 

In P. Carruthers & P. K. Smith (Eds.), Theories of Theories of Mind (pp. 257 - 

273). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Castelli, F., Happé, F., Frith, U., & Frith, C. (2000). Movement and mind: a 

functional imaging study of perception and interpretation of complex intentional 

movement patterns. NeuroImage, 12, 314-25.  

Davidson, M. C., Amso, D., Anderson, L. C., & Diamond, A. (2006). Development of 

cognitive control and executive functions from 4 to 13 years: Evidence from 

manipulations of memory, inhibition and task switching. Neuropsychologia, 44, 

2037 - 2078. 

 

41 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Del Giudice, M. (2014). Middle childhood: An evolutionary-developmental synthesis. 

Child Development Perspectives, 8, 193 – 200.  

Devine, R. T., & Hughes, C. (2013). Silent films and strange stories: Theory of mind, 

gender, and social experiences in middle childhood. Child Development, 84, 989 - 

1003. 

Devine, R. T., & Hughes, C. (2014). Relations between false belief understanding and 

executive function in early childhood: A meta-analysis. Child Development, 85, 

1777 – 1794. 

Dumontheil, I., Apperly, I. A., & Blakemore, S.J. (2010). Online usage of theory of 

mind continues to develop in late adolescence. Developmental Science, 13, 331 - 

338. 

Dunn, J., Brown, J., Slomkowski, C., Tesla, C., & Youngblade, L. (1991). Young 

children’s understanding of other people's feelings and beliefs: Individual 

differences and their antecedents. Child Development, 62, 1352 - 1366. 

Dunn, L., Dunn, D., Whetton, C., & Burley, J. (1997). British Picture Vocabulary 

Scale (2nd ed.). Windsor, UK: NFER Nelson. 

Duval, C., Piolino, P., Bejanin, A., Eustache, F., & Desgranges, B. (2011). Age 

effects on different components of theory of mind. Consciousness and Cognition, 

20, 627 - 642. 

Espy, K.A., Sheffield, T.D., Wiebe, S.A., Clark, C.A.C. & Moehr, M. (2011). 

Executive control and dimensions of problem behaviors in preschool children. 

Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 52, 33 – 46.  

Gerstadt, C. L., Hong, Y. J., & Diamond, A. (1994). The relationship between 

cognition and action: Performance of children 3 1/2 - 7 years old on a Stroop-like 

day-night test. Cognition, 53, 129-153.  

 

42 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Gresham, F. M., & Elliot, S. N. (1990). Social Skills Rating System Manual. Circle 

Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 

Happé, F. (1994). An advanced test of theory of mind: Understanding of story 

characters’ thoughts and feelings by able, mentally handicapped and normal 

children. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 24, 129 - 154. 

Harms, M.B., Zayas, V., Meltzoff, A.N. & Carlson, S.M. (2014). Stability of 

executive function and predictions to adaptive behavior from middle childhood to 

pre-adolescence. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 331, 1 – 11.  

Harris, P. L., Johnson, C. N., Hutton, D., Andrews, G., & Cooke, T. (1989). Young 

children’s theory of mind and emotion. Cognition & Emotion, 3, 379 - 400. 

Hongwanishkul, D., Happaney, K.R., Lee, W.S. & Zelazo, P.D. (2005). Assessment 

of hot and cool executive function in young children: age-related changes and 

individual differences. Developmental Neuropsychology, 28, 617 – 644.  

Hughes, C. (1998). Finding your marbles: Does preschoolers’ strategic behavior 

predict later understanding of mind? Developmental Psychology, 34, 1326-1339. 

Hughes, C., Adlam, A., Happé, F., Jackson, J., Taylor, A. & Caspi, A. (2000). Good 

test-retest reliability for standard and advanced false-belief tasks across a wide 

range of abilities. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 41, 483 – 490.  

Hughes, C., & Devine, R. T. (2015). A social perspective on theory of mind. In M. E. 

Lamb (Ed.), Handbook of Child Psychology and Developmental Science (Volume 

III): Socioemotional Processes (7th ed., pp. 564 - 609). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 

Hughes, C., & Ensor, R. (2005). Executive function and theory of mind in 2 year olds: 

A family affair? Developmental Neuropsychology, 28, 645-668.  

Hughes, C. & Ensor, R. (2007). Executive function and theory of mind: Predictive 

relations from ages 2 to 4. Developmental Psychology, 43, 1447 – 1459.  

 

43 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Hughes, C., Ensor, R., & Marks, A. (2011). Individual differences in false belief 

understanding are stable from 3 to 6 years of age and predict children’s mental 

state talk with school friends. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 108, 96-

112.  

Hughes, C., & Ensor, R. (2011). Individual differences in growth in executive 

function across the transition to school predict externalizing and internalizing 

behaviors and self-perceived academic success at 6 years of age. Journal of 

Experimental Child Psychology, 108, 663-676.  

Hughes, C., Jaffee, S., Happé, F., Taylor, A., Caspi, A., & Moffitt, T. E. (2005). 

Origins of individual differences in theory of mind: From nature to nurture? Child 

Development, 76, 356 - 370. 

Huizinga, M., Dolan, C. V., & Van Der Molen, M. W. (2006). Age-related change in 

executive function: Developmental trends and a latent variable analysis. 

Neuropsychologia, 44, 2017 - 2036. 

Jenkins, J. M., & Astington, J. W. (2000). Theory of mind and social behavior: Causal 

models tested in a longitudinal study. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 46, 203 - 220. 

Lagattuta, K.H., Sayfan, L. & Blattman, A.J. (2010). Forgetting common ground: Six- 

to seven-year-olds have an over-interpretive theory of mind. Developmental 

Psychology, 46, 1417 – 1432.  

Lagattuta, K.H., Sayfan, L. & Harvey, 2014. Beliefs about thought probability: 

Evidence for persistent errors in mindreading and links to executive control. Child 

Development, 85, 659 – 674.  

Lecce, S., Bianco, F., Devine, R. T., Hughes, C., & Banerjee, R. (2014). Promoting 

theory of mind in middle childhood: A training program. Journal of Experimental 

Child Psychology, 126, 52 – 67.  

 

44 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

McClelland, M.M., Cameron, C.E., Connor, C.M., Farris, C.L., Jewkes, A.M. & 

Morrison, F.J. (2007). Links between behavioral regulation and preschoolers’ 

literacy, vocabulary and math skills. Developmental Psychology, 43, 947 – 959.  

Meins, E., Fernyhough, C., Johnson, F. & Lidstone, J. (2006). Mind-mindedness in 

children: Individual differences in internal-state talk in middle childhood. British 

Journal of Developmental Psychology, 24, 181 – 196.  

Miyake, A. & Friedman, N.P. (2012). The nature and organization of individual 

differences in executive functions: Four general conclusions. Current Directions in 

Psychological Science, 21, 8 – 14.  

Miyake, A., Friedman, N.P., Emerson, M.J., Witzki, A.H. & Howerter, A. (2000). 

The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex 

‘frontal lobe’ tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cognitive Psychology, 41, 49 – 100. 

Muthèn, B.O. (1997). Latent variable modelling with longitudinal and multilevel data. 

In A. Raftery (Ed.), Sociological Methodology (pp. 453 0 480). Boston: Blackwell. 

Muthèn, B. O. (2004). Mplus Technical Appendices. Los Angeles, CA: Muthèn and 

Muthèn. 

Muthèn, L. K., & Muthèn, B. (2002). How to use a Monte Carlo study to decide on 

sample size and determine power. Structural Equation Modeling, 9, 599 – 620.  

Muthèn, L. K., & Muthèn, B. (2012). MPlus: Statistical Analysis with Latent 

Variables User Guide. (7th ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Muthèn and Muthèn. 

Newton, E. & Jenvey, V. (2011). Play and theory of mind: Associations with social 

competence in young children. Early Child Development and Care, 181, 761 – 

773.  

Perner, J., & Lang, B. (1999). Development of theory of mind and executive control. 

Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3, 337 - 344. 

 

45 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Perner, J., & Lang, B. (2000). Theory of mind and executive function: Is there a 

developmental relationship? In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, & D. J. Cohen 

(Eds.), Understanding Other Minds: Perspectives from Developmental Cognitive 

Neuroscience (2nd ed., pp. 150 - 181). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Perner, J., Lang, B., & Kloo, D. (2002). Theory of mind and self-control: more than a 

common problem of inhibition. Child Development, 73, 752-67.  

Ratcliffe, M. (2007). Rethinking Commonsense Psychology: A Critique of Folk 

Psychology, Theory of Mind and Simulation. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Razza, R. & Blair, C. (2009). Associations among false belief understanding, 

executive function and social competence: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of 

Applied Developmental Psychology, 30, 310 – 320.  

Rhoades, B. L., Greenberg, M. T., & Domitrovich, C. E. (2009). The contribution of 

inhibitory control to preschoolers’ social–emotional competence. Journal of 

Applied Developmental Psychology, 30, 310-320.  

Ronald, A., Viding, E., Happé, F., & Plomin, R. (2006). Individual differences in 

theory of mind ability in middle childhood and links with verbal ability and autistic 

traits: A twin study. Social Neuroscience, 1, 412-425. 

Russell, J. (1996). Agency: Its Role in Mental Development. Hove, UK: Erlbaum 

Taylor & Francis. 

Shallice, T. (1982). Specific impairments of planning. Philosophical Transactions of 

the Royal Society of London: Biological Sciences, 298, 199 - 209. 

Slaughter, V., & Repacholi, B. (2003). Individual differences in theory of mind: What 

are we investigating? In B. Repacholi & V. Slaughter (Eds.), Individual 

Differences in Theory of Mind. (pp. 1 - 12). Hove, UK: Psychology Press. 

 

46 

Running Head: THEORY OF MIND IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD 

Stone, L. L., Otten, R., Engles, R., Vermulst, A. A., & Janssens, J. (2010). 

Psychometric properties of the parent and teacher versions of the strengths and 

difficulties questionnaire for 4- to 12-year-olds: A review. Clinical Child and 

Family Psychology Review, 13, 254 - 274.  

Sullivan, K., Zaitchik, D., & Tager-Flusberg, H. (1994). Preschoolers can attribute 

second-order beliefs. Developmental Psychology, 30, 395 - 402. 

Thorndike, R. L., Hagen, E. P., & Sattler, J. M. (1986). Stanford-Binet Intelligence 

Scales. Chicago: Riverside. 

Tucker-Drob, E. M., & Briley, D. A. (2014). Continuity of genetic and environmental 

influences on cognition across the life span: A meta-analysis of longitudinal twin 

and adoption studies. Psychological Bulletin. doi: 10.1037/a0035893. 

Watson, A. C., Nixon, C. L., Wilson, A., & Capage, L. (1999). Social interaction 

skills and theory of mind in young children. Developmental Psychology, 35, 386-

391.  

Wellman, H.M. (2014). Making Minds: How Theory of Mind Develops. Oxford, UK: 

Oxford University Press. 

Wellman, H.M., Cross, D. & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind 

development: The truth about false belief. Child Development, 72, 655 – 684. 

White, S., Hill, E., Happé, F. & Frith, U. (2009). Revisiting the strange stories: 

Revealing mentalizing impairments in autism. Child Development, 80, 1097 – 

1117.  

Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and 

constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children’s understanding of 

deception. Cognition, 13, 103 - 128. 

 

 

47 

