 
 
A Longitudinal Study of White Children's Racial Prejudice as a Social-Cognitive
Development
Author(s): Anna Beth Doyle and  Frances E. Aboud
Source: Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, Vol. 41, No. 2 (April 1995), pp. 209-228
Published by: Wayne State University Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23090532
Accessed: 26-05-2020 09:53 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Wayne State University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to Merrill-Palmer Quarterly

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, Vol. 41, No. 2.

 A Longitudinal Study of White Children's Racial
 Prejudice as a Social-Cognitive Development

 Anna Beth Doyle

 Concordia University

 Frances E. Aboud
 McCill University

 Longitudinal changes between ages 6 and 9 years in white children's (η = 47)
 prejudice towards black people and Native Indians were examined, with use of the
 Preschool Racial Attitude Measure (PRAM II) and a multiple-response racial attitude
 measure (MRA). Additional children (n = 40) were tested at age 9. In both samples,
 older children were less prejudiced on the PRAM than younger children, most of
 whom were prejudiced. On the MRA, which measured attitudes to each racial group
 independently, favorable-white and unfavorable-black evaluations did not decline
 with age, but unfavorable-white and favorable-black evaluations increased. These
 decreases in prejudice were associated developmental^ with the perception that
 different races are more similar, that individuals of the same race are more different,
 and that racially different perspectives are both acceptable. Perception of within
 race similarity was associated positively with individual differences in prejudice at
 each age.

 Prejudice and discrimination are major social problems in hetero
 geneous societies such as North America and Europe. Racial prejudice,
 a predisposition to respond in an unfavorable manner to members of a
 racial group (Aboud, 1988), is often viewed as primarily a problem of
 adults and adolescents, but not of children (Allport, 1954). Evidence has
 accumulated, however, that prejudice in young white children is high,
 peaking at about kindergarten and then declining somewhat (Bigler &
 Liben, 1993; Brown & Johnson, 1971; Corenblum & Annis, 1987; Katz

 This research was supported by Quebec FCAR. Portions of this paper were reported
 at the Society for Research in Child Development, Kansas City, 1989, and the Canadian
 Psychological Association, Ottawa, 1990. Thanks to the children, teachers, and principals
 of Harold Napper and Royal Charles Elementary Schools for participating, and to Maria
 Sufrategui, Laurie McMurdo, Audrey Rotman, and Carla Vandoni for their help in data
 collection. Correspondence may be sent to Anna Beth Doyle, Centre for Research in Human
 Development, Concordia University, 7141 Sherbrooke St. W., Montreal, Canada H4B 1R6.

 Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, April 1995, Vol. 41, No. 2, pp. 209-228.
 Copyright © 1995 by Wayne State University Press, Detroit, Ml 48201-1309

 209

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 & Zalk, 1978; Ramsey, 1991 ; Williams & Morland, 1976). These conclu
 sions are based on cross-sectional rather than longitudinal comparisons;
 consequently, it is not known to what extent measures of prejudice
 reflect stable individual differences across age and/or to what extent
 age changes in prejudice in majority-group children are explained by
 developmental variables such as social-cognitive growth. One purpose
 of the present study was to examine longitudinal changes in prejudice
 and its component attitudes from 6 to 9 years of age. A second purpose
 was to explore several social cognitions related to race that might explain
 developmental changes.

 Longitudinal Changes in Racial Bias and Counter-bias

 Cross-sectional studies have indicated that in many samples of white

 children prejudice declines during the elementary school years (e.g.,
 Bigler & Liben, 1993). One interpretation of these findings is that relative
 levels of prejudice remain the same among individual children whereas
 absolute levels decline developmentally (i.e., individual differences re
 main stable despite age changes). Another interpretation is that both
 relative and developmental changes occur. A third possibility is that
 cohort differences account for the decline in prejudice with age. The
 present study combines a longitudinal with a cross-sectional design to
 distinguish among these different interpretations.

 Single-response measures of prejudice, which typically decrease

 with age (e.g., the Preschool Racial Attitude Measure—PRAM II), have
 been criticized for yielding only one index that confounds acceptance
 of one group with rejection of the other (Aboud, 1988; Branch & New
 combe, 1986). That is, because only one race can be selected for each
 positive and negative evaluation, it is unclear whether the observed
 decrease in prejudice with age reflects a decrease in ethnocentric bias
 or an increase in attitudes that run counter to bias (i.e., an increase in
 positive attitudes to other groups and/or an increase in negative attitudes
 to own group).

 Studies in which multiple response measures of ethnic bias were
 used shed some light on this question. Doyle, Beaudet, and Aboud
 (1988) permitted English-speaking children to assign positive and neg
 ative traits to either English- and French-speaking stimulus figures or to
 a "both" category. Ethnic bias (positive evaluations of own group and
 negative evaluations of the other group) decreased from Grades 1 to 6 in
 conjunction with an increase in use of the "both" category. Bigler and
 Liben (1993) replicated these findings with 4- to 9-year-olds' attitudes to
 black and white people, indicating that attitudes to linguistically defined

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Racial Prejudice 211

 ethnic groups and to racial groups develop similarly. The increasing use
 of the "both" box implies a developmental increase in counter-bias at
 titudes, which, unfortunately, could not be assessed independently from
 prejudiced attitudes. That is, assignment of a negative evaluation to the
 "both" category reflects both a negative response to own group (counter
 bias) and a negative evaluation of the outgroup (bias). Bigler and Liben
 (1993) also found that older children tended (marginally) to give more
 responses that ran directly counter to prejudice. We predicted that when
 attitudes to own group and other group are assessed independently, a
 similar developmental pattern will be found. On the other hand, attitudes
 consistent with prejudice were not expected to change with age.

 Socio-cognitive Correlates of Age Changes in Prejudice

 There is mounting evidence to support the view that declines in

 white children's prejudice during the early elementary school years are
 associated with increases in cognitive and socio-cognitive skills con
 current with the transition from preoperational to concrete-operational
 thought. These findings are consistent with a cognitive developmental
 perspective (Aboud, 1988; Katz, 1976), in which children's prejudice is
 determined partly by their limited cognitive abilities. As noted earlier,
 however, longitudinal studies of associations between temporal changes
 in prejudice and cognitions are lacking.

 In terms of the particular cognitive abilities implicated, children

 who have mastered conservation have been found to be less prejudiced
 (Clark, Hocevar, & Dembo, 1980). Because by age 9 years most chil
 dren have mastered most conservation tasks (Gulko, Doyle, Serbin, &
 White, 1988), but only some children are unprejudiced, other cogni
 tions also may be implicated in accounting for decreases in prejudice.
 Cross-sectional studies of 4- to 9-year-olds suggest that classification skill
 accounts for the positive relation between age and "both" responses, but
 not prejudiced responses (Bigler & Liben, 1993). Mature moral judgments
 have been found to predict lower prejudice (Davidson, 1976); however,
 movement from one moral stage to another is very slow in young chil
 dren. Another promising social cognition to examine is reconciliation of
 different perspectives, which is central to the cognitive-developmental
 theory of Piaget and Weil (1951) and Kohlberg (1969) concerning chil
 dren's understanding of different national groups. In addition, perceived
 similarity within and between races has been noted as significantly re
 lated to prejudice and its reduction (Katz, 1976).

 Piaget and Weil (1951) proposed that, with the development of

 perspective-taking skills, children understand the feelings of different

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 groups, and so show less prejudice toward them. They noted that the
 understanding of national/racial relationships includes, first, reciprocity
 (i.e., the awareness that other nationalities prefer their ingroup as much
 as the child prefers his/her ingroup), and then, reconciliation (i.e., the
 awareness that both are right). Reconciliation is essential for reducing
 prejudice, because reciprocity alone could as easily result in reciprocal
 prejudice, in which a child assumes that each group prefers its own group
 and dislikes the other. Failure to assess reconciliation may account for
 the findings in one study of 7- to 10-year-olds of no significant relation
 between two conventional measures of perspective-taking and either
 the Katz-Zalk Projective Test or the Preschool Racial Attitude Measure
 (Nagata, 1985). Ability to reconcile two different racial perspectives
 increases from 5 to 9 years of age (Aboud, 1981) and correlates with
 social perspective-taking (Weinheimer, 1972). In the present study, we
 expected that white children who show greater improvement in recon
 ciliation of different racial views from kindergarten to third grade also
 show a greater decline in prejudice.

 It has been established that the perception of similarity within races
 and dissimilarity between races is an important component of racial
 prejudice (Linville, Fischer, & Salovey, 1989; Messick & Mackie, 1989).
 With age, white children have been found to rate members of different
 races more similarly and members of the same race more differently
 (Aboud & Mitchell, 1977; Katz, Sohn, & Zalk, 1975). Though individual
 differences in perceived between-race similarity are related to prejudice
 (Katz et al., 1975), developmental changes in association to prejudice
 merit study. We expected children whose perceived similarity between
 races increases between kindergarten and third grade to show a greater
 decline in prejudice.

 The second skill, perceiving individual differences within racial

 groups, was found to be significantly related to lower levels of prejudice
 in sixth-grade children (Katz et al., 1975). They hypothesized that when
 children begin to attend to individual characteristics of group members,
 instead of racial characteristics, their negative attitudes are likewise less
 generalized. Because perceptions of between-race similarity appear to
 change more rapidly in the early school years than perceptions of within
 race differences (Aboud & Mitchell, 1977; Katz et al., 1975), we expected
 changes in the former to be a more important determinant of changes in
 prejudice in young children.

 The present study is focused on longitudinal changes in prejudice
 and its components, bias and counter-bias, from kindergarten to third
 grade, and their relations to developmental changes in social cognitions.
 Four cognitive skills most relevant to this age group were examined:

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Racial Prejudice 213

 conservation, reconciliation of social perspectives, perceived similarity
 between races, and perceived similarity of individuals within a race.

 METHOD

 Participants

 Ninety-six, white, English-speaking children participated in the cross

 sectional design at Time 1, 56 in kindergarten (32 girls; mean age 5.9
 years, SD = 0.28) and 40 in third grade (20 girls; M = 8.9 years, SD
 = 0.79). Forty-seven of these kindergarten children (27 girls) constituted
 the longitudinal sample and were retested when they were in third grade
 (Time 2). Children were primarily middle-class in background (/Vf = 40.6,
 SD = 13; Hollingshead, 1975) and attended two suburban public schools
 in a large Canadian city. The school populations were predominantly
 white, and approximately 10% black, 10% East Indian, and 20% Asian.
 Parents gave written consent for participation (acceptance 56%, no re
 sponse 39.5%, and refusal 4.5%).

 Measures of Racial Attitudes

 Prejudice measure. An adaptation of the Preschool Racial Attitude

 Measure II (PRAM II) series A (Williams, Best, Boswell, Mattson, &
 Graves, 1975) consisting of 12 racial evaluation items and four gender
 stereotype filler items, was used to measure pro-white/anti-black preju
 dice. A second version with identical evaluation items but using Native
 Indian and white stimulus persons was used in assessing the gener
 alization of prejudice to a second outgroup. (A large Native Indian
 community was located within a few miles of the schools where testing
 was conducted.) The original PRAM pictures of black and white stimulus
 persons were redrawn to vary hair texture as well as skin color in order
 to permit clear identification of the minority group figures as black or
 Native Indian. In addition, the racial groups of the persons depicted
 were mentioned for the first few items of each version to ensure that the
 child would identify them accurately. The six positive adjectives and six
 negative adjectives composing the racial evaluation items were clean,
 nice, kind, happy, healthy, wonderful, bad, stupid, ugly, cruel, sad, and
 selfish. For each adjective the child was shown the corresponding picture
 and asked, for example, "One of these children is kind; once he saved
 a kitten from drowning. Who is kind?"

 As in the original PRAM II, one point was given for choosing a white

 figure in response to a positive adjective, and one point for choosing

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 a black/Native Indian figure in response to a negative adjective. The
 maximum score for each of the white/black and white/Native Indian
 versions was 12. As defined by Williams and Morland (1976), high scores
 (>9) indicated pro-white/anti-other-race bias, scores around the midpoint
 indicated no bias, and low scores (<3) indicated anti-white bias.

 The internal consistencies (Cronbach's alpha) at Time 1 for both
 versions of the scale were acceptable, but lower in kindergarten (.46
 and .64) than in grade three (both .77 for white/black and white/Native
 Indian, respectively), in part because the kindergarten scores were high.
 Multi-response Racial Attitude Measure (MRA). To permit age
 changes to be examined separately for positive and negative attitudes,
 and for bias and counter-bias, Doyle et al.'s (1988) measure of attitudes
 to two groups was adapted to assess attitudes to the three racial groups,
 black, white and Native Indian. Each of 20 evaluative adjectives were
 presented with a concrete behavioral example depicted identically on
 three 8 X 8-in. cards (total 60 cards). For example, "naughty" was
 depicted by three cards showing a room with crayons on the floor and
 crayon scribbles on one wall. There were 10 positive adjectives taken
 from the PRAM II (clean, wonderful, healthy, good, nice, happy, friendly,
 kind, helpful, and smart), 10 negative adjectives (unfriendly, mean, dirty,
 cruel, stupid, selfish, sick, naughty, sad, and bad), and four neutral filler
 attributes. The cards were to be sorted among three boxes: one labeled
 as belonging to a white child, another to a black child, and the third to
 a Native Indian child, identified by appropriate same-sex, colored head
 drawings, differing only in skin color and hair texture.

 For each adjective, the child was handed the three identical cards
 and instructed to place them in the box or boxes of people who are that
 way. For example, the child was told, "Some children are naughty. They
 often do things like drawing on the wall with crayons. Who is naughty?
 Is it the black child, the white child, the Indian child, or more than
 one child who is naughty?" Children distributed non-evaluative stimuli
 (photos of racial group members, drawings of t-shirts) to practice two
 types of distributions of three identical pictures (i.e., members of the
 same racial group all to one box and t-shirts to more than one box).

 The number of adjectives rather than the number of cards placed in
 each box was tallied. Six scores were derived initially, a positive and a
 negative score for each of the three racial groups, each with a possible
 range of 0-10. Internal consistency (alpha) varied from .79 to .91 at Time
 1. Test-retest reliability across a 4-month interval for a sample of Grade
 4 children ranged from .56 for negative-white to .82 for negative-black.
 To obtain a prejudice score comparable to the white/black PRAM,
 the positive-white and negative-black MRA scores, which correlated

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Racial Prejudice 215

 .39 and .47 for kindergarten and Grade 3, respectively, were summed
 (Tabachnick & Fidel I, 1989) to yield a white/black bias score (range from
 0 to 20). A white/black counter-bias score was derived by summing the
 negative-white and positive-black scores, which correlated .68 and .70
 at kindergarten and Grade 3, respectively. Similar bias and counter-bias
 scores were derived for the white/Native Indian MRA scores.

 Cognitive Measures

 Conservation. The level of concrete operational thinking was evalu

 ated with use of an adaptation (Gulko et al., 1988) of the Goldschmidt
 and Bentler Concept Assessment Kit. Seven conservation tasks were ad
 ministered: area, number, substance, continuous quality, weight, discon
 tinuous quantity, and volume, in that order. Answers which demonstrated
 conservation with at least a partially correct explanation were scored as
 correct; the number of tasks correct indicated cognitive developmental
 level (maximum 7).

 Racial reconciliation. Aboud's (1981 ) measure of reconciliation was

 adapted. Children were asked to reconcile the difference between their
 own racial preference and those of two unfamiliar same-sex children.
 Subjects indicated their preferences by placing color photographs of two
 white, two black, and two Indian same-sex children on a 60-cm board
 that stretched away from them, the closer, the more the pictured child
 was liked, and the farther away, the less he/she was liked. The pho
 tographs were of unfamiliar children of approximately the same age and
 had been judged by 40 college students to be of intermediate attractive
 ness. The tester then asked children to compare and evaluate their own
 ratings with those of two other children in the following manner, (a) The
 tester showed a picture of another child of the least-liked other race and
 indicated that child's preference ratings by arranging a duplicate set of
 identical photos on a second board in the reverse order to the subject's.
 The tester asked, "This is how you put them; this is how s/he put them.
 Are both of you right or is someone wrong?" (b) The tester then showed
 a picture of a white child, indicated that he/she liked the people in the
 reverse order to the subject, and asked if both were right or if someone
 was wrong. One point was awarded for each response indicating that
 both subject and picture child could be right (reconciliation), range 0 to
 2) Scores for the two items were uncorrelated (r = .13 and .18, η s, for
 kindergarten and Grade 3, respectively).

 Ά third item was included to rule out the possibility that children failed to rec

 oncile with the other race because of prejudice. On this item, a second child from the

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 Perceived similarity within and between race. Children were asked
 to rate the similarity of 12 pairs of color photographs of same-race and
 different-race, same-sex children. As adapted from the study by Aboud
 and Mitchell (1977), the children were given one pair of photographs
 at a time and asked to place them, facing each other, on a 60-cm
 board, those closer together the more similar they were judged to be and
 those farther apart the more different. Perceived between-group similarity
 was scored as 60 minus the mean distance between six different-race
 pairs (two from each of black-white, white-Indian, Indian-black). Internal
 consistency (alpha) at Time 1 was .73 and .84, for kindergarten and
 Grade 3, respectively. Within-group similarity was scored as 60 minus
 the mean distance between six same-race pairs (two from each of black
 black, white-white, Indian-Indian). Internal consistency at Time 1 was
 .80 and .76 for kindergarten and Grade 3, respectively, with own-race
 and other-race stimuli contributing equally. Test-retest reliability across
 a 4-month interval for Grade 4 children ranged from .62 to .74 for the
 different races. Scores were subtracted from 60 so that higher scores
 indicated greater perceived similarity.2

 Procedure

 Each child participated in three sessions lasting approximately 25
 min each, spaced 2 weeks apart on average (range 1 to 4). The measures
 of interest were interspersed with additional measures of racial awareness
 not relevant to the present study.3 The racial measures were administered
 in the first two sessions, the conservation task in the third session. The
 PRAM and MRA were given in separate sessions to avoid spurious corre
 lation between them, with order counterbalanced within school, grade,
 and gender. The remaining tasks were given in three counterbalanced
 orders. Kindergartners were retested in Grade 3 on all but the Native
 Indian-white PRAM, omitted because it correlated substantially with the
 black-white PRAM (r = .67), and provided redundant developmental

 least preferred race was shown with an arrangement in the same order as the subject. If
 responses were due to prejudice towards the outgroup rather than to the ability to reconcile
 differences, then children would reconcile on Item 2 (same-race), but not on Items 1 and
 3 (other-race). Only two subjects out of 47 showed this pattern. Thus, failure to reconcile
 was not due to prejudice.

 2Full procedures of all measures may be obtained from the authors.
 3They were recognition of the races, recognition of the label used for self, spontaneous
 sorting of the photos, and a two-item measure of racial group members' perceived social
 status.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Racial Prejudice 21 7

 information in the cross-sectional sample, and the three additional mea
 sures of racial awareness. All testing was carried out by white women.

 Overview

 RESULTS

 Longitudinal changes and measure differences (black/white, Native
 Indian/white) in PRAM prejudice are presented first. To clarify the nature
 of age changes in PRAM prejudice, longitudinal changes and race-of
 target differences (white, black, Native Indian) on the MRA measures are
 then presented and compared with the PRAM. Longitudinal changes in
 the cognitive measures are then presented. Similar analyses performed on
 the cross-sectional data are reported in each section. Finally, longitudinal
 changes in the PRAM and MRA racial attitude scores are examined in
 relation to longitudinal changes in the cognitive measures.

 Preliminary Data Analyses

 Because no major or systematic differences were found in the cross
 sectional data, sex, school, and order of testing were not retained as
 factors in analyses. Analyses of the label recognition measure indicated
 that, when given the racial group label, children had little difficulty
 identifying photos of black and white children (means initially correct
 were 2.92 and 2.45, respectively, out of 3) but some difficulty with the
 Indian photos (mean 1.32). However, no child took more than three
 trials to accurately identify the race of each pictured child. There was
 no significant grade or grade-by-race effect on this measure.

 Prejudice Measures

 PRAM II revised. In the longitudinal sample, black/white PRAM

 scores decreased from kindergarten to Grade 3, f(44) = 4.27, ρ < .001.
 To investigate cross-sectional differences, a 2 (Grade) X 2 (PRAM Ver
 sion) analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted on PRAM scores
 with PRAM version (black/white, Native Indian/white) as a repeated fac
 tor. Differences between grades and between versions were significant,
 F( 1, 93) = 15.8, ρ < .001, and 5.1, ρ < .05 (see Table 1). Children
 in Grade 3 were less prejudiced than kindergarten children on both
 versions. At both ages, children were somewhat less prejudiced to Native
 Indians than to black people.

 An examination of extreme scores (>9) (Williams and Moreland,

 1976) indicated that 85% of kindergartners were biased against black

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 !ΙΓ^Γ <^ΐ^£}'ΙΓ'ΙΓ ^ «-ο TUT ΙΖΓ ^ HT !Ζ"
 οο cooocccoocoo
 V ν ν ν ν ν ν ν ν  ν ν ν

 σ) ο
 (ν ro

 a^aiKro^^cqKfNOLnK
 <— τ— csirocNCsirOLO^^tLO^O

 o
 co  co

 o

 ro  o  ΓΝ|

 SO
 l\  co  l\  co  l\

 r  vX)

 LO
 ΤΦ  rsi

 LO

 ro

 LO

 τ—

 2 ι
 9 1
 V

 r\
 rsi

 v£>

 CO

 τ

 ,—

 τ—

 ty> o  *—  Ο <n  to V) O  τ—  <j~, ο τ—
 c o  o  o C  eco  ο  c ο  ο
 ν

 V  V  ν

 ν

 ν

 ν

 Τ  LO LO Τ
 ο  LO cm  ο
 ο  o  ο  ο
 ν  ν
 ν

 ιί

 a^^^Lncqr\r\|r\|coT— r— T^j
 O CN fN ro *— (Ν (N lo 't rn iri Tf

 κ^^)^σ;ΓΜ^οθΓ\σ]θσι
 (^cocoKcococoLnfNK^r-^

 cq^roK^KcocoKi^^prn
 Τ— rOrOrOCNCsirOvD^rO^vO

 Table 1. Means and (Standard Deviations) and Significance Levels for Grade Comparisons

 Ι\

 ΓΟ

 Ò

 Γ—

 <
 c¿
 CL·

 (V
 ~σ
 3

 * ^
 <d Λ
 %t·

 O —
 CL CD
 <S)

 Ç2 OJ <

 °PoI

 <
 C*

 φ
 "Ό

 cd ~
 i/i _C

 i£ θ3 (D
 § 5
 Cl cd
 ΙΛ >
 cu ~

 o
 =5 Cl.

 c
 .2
 TD
 c
 Cû —
 ^ cd
 -* >
 U \p
 as as

 Ζ Ζ  £  CÛ  Ζ

 <d
 >

 cd
 >

 cd
 >

 Π3

 OJ

 rC
 DO 00 00 £
 î) ï) d) Π3

 <S) (S)

 .2 O
 û.û.ZZZm0^m0

 co  τ °i  rsj

 <ό  νβ

 -φ co  r\  r\ τ—  o  v¿

 ro

 vD  co
 "φ

 ro

 ro <3)
 r— ro

 ro  Γ

 00

 Ö

 '— *—

 *—  *—

 _ <D

 •"ë >*
 _ns .tt
 e à

 Φ c/>

 - Ζ
 ζ  > 03
 > a;
 ^ £
 Π3 ο;
 _ E >
 3 E~

 S «■
 > c γ :
 ¿ eu Λ
 0) a; .E
 ï|i _
 5 c O oj '<» 03
 u~, g>U CQ 5- o¿

 U

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Racial Prejudice 219

 people compared with 52% of the same children in third grade (50% in
 cross-sectional sample). With respect to Native Indians, 70% of kinder
 garten children were prejudiced, compared with 45% of Grade 3 chil
 dren in the cross-sectional sample. Thus, by Williams and Moreland's
 (1976) definition, a considerable number of the younger children were
 prejudiced toward both minority groups.

 Multi-response Racial Attitude Measure (MRA). To evaluate more

 closely the nature of age changes in prejudice, for the longitudinal sam
 ple's positive and negative MRA scores, a 2 (Grade) X 3 (Evaluations of
 White People, Black People, Native Indians) repeated measures multi
 variate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was conducted. For both positive
 and negative evaluations, there were significant interactions of grade
 and race, F(2, 92) = 4.4, ρ < .025 and 5.1, ρ < .01. As verified by
 Tukey HSD post-hoc tests (p < .05), positive evaluations of white people
 did not change significantly with age but increased for evaluations of
 black people and Native Indians (see Table 1). Conversely, negative
 evaluations of white people increased with age but did not change for
 evaluations of black people and Native Indians. As verified by analyses
 of simple effects and Sheffé post-hoc tests (p < .05), kindergarten children
 were significantly more positive to white than to black people or Native
 Indians, and more negative to black people and Native Indians than
 to white people, whereas by Grade 3, the three races did not differ
 significantly in either positive or negative evaluations. Thus, attributes
 counter to prejudice increased with age.

 These interactions qualified significant main effects of grade, F( 1, 46)

 = 13.9, ρ < .001, and 9.1, ρ < .01, and race, F(2, 92) = 29.2 and 34.9,
 ρ < .001. Scores were higher in Grade 3 than in kindergarten. Children
 were more positive to white people and negative to black people and
 Native Indians (Sheffé ρ < .05). These results were replicated in the
 cross-sectional sample (see Table 1).

 The longitudinal MRA bias and counter-bias indices were subjected

 to a 2 (Grade) by 2 (Target Minority Group: white/black [W/B], white/
 Native Indian fW/NI]) MANOVA with repeated measures on both factors.
 Both the W/B and W/NI bias scores increased slightly with grade F( 1, 46)
 = 3.84, ρ = .056, though the Tukey HSD post-hoc tests indicated no
 significant differences. There was more bias against black people than
 Native Indians at both ages, F( 1, 46) = 10.9, ρ < .01.

 Both the W/B and W/NI counter-bias scores increased significantly

 with grade, F( 1, 46) = 14.5, ρ < .001, with no difference between the
 W/B and W/NI measures, F( 1, 46) = 2.0, ns. Given these age changes,
 which indicate that decreases in prejudice may reflect increases in coun
 ter-bias attitudes rather than decreases in bias, a single MRA summary

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 measure was computed by subtracting the counter-bias index from the
 bias index. A 2 (Grade) by 2 (Measure: W/B, W/NI) ANOVA indicated
 that both the W/B and W/NI MRA summary scores decreased signifi
 cantly with grade, F( 1, 46) = 9.28, ρ < .01, and that the W/B score was
 higher than W/NI at both grades, F( 1, 46) = 9.23, ρ < .01. Similar age
 changes in MRA scores were replicated with the cross-sectional sample.
 Relations between PRAM and MRA scores. The W/B PRAM corre

 lated significantly in kindergarten with W/B MRA bias (r = .43, ρ < .01),
 but not W/B MRA counter-bias (r = .07) or the MRA summary score (r =
 .18, ns). By third grade, the W/B PRAM correlated less with W/B MRA
 bias (r = .26, ns) and somewhat more with W/B MRA counter-bias (r
 = -.28, ρ = .05) and summary score (r = .43, ρ < .01). In the cross
 sectional sample, third-grade W/B PRAM correlated significantly with
 MRA counter-bias (r = -.48) and summary score (r = .52, ρ < .01), but
 not with MRA bias, (r = .13, ns).

 Neither the PRAM nor the MRA measures correlated significantly

 from Time 1 to Time 2 in the longitudinal sample (r ranged from .02 to
 .04, ns). Thus, changes in racial attitudes reflected predominantly devel
 opmental level rather than stable individual differences, and an analysis
 of covariance approach to assessing the relationship of change in PRAM
 scores to change in MRA bias and counter-bias was precluded (Cohen
 & Cohen, 1983). Instead, difference scores were calculated (Grade 3
 minus kindergarten). For the PRAM and MRA counter-bias and summary
 scores, 80% of the children showed reduced prejudice or no change
 over time, with change ranging from 0 to -8 on the PRAM, 0 to 19
 on MRA counter-bias, and 0 to —22 on MRA summary. In contrast,
 for MRA bias, only 35% of scores decreased or stayed the same, range
 0 to —6. Decreases over time in the PRAM score in the longitudinal
 sample correlated significantly with decreases in MRA bias (r = .38), ρ
 < .01, with increases in MRA counter-bias (r = -.34), ρ < .01, and with
 decreases in the MRA summary score (r = .52), ρ < .001.4

 Conservation, Reconciliation, and Perceived Similarity

 A MANOVA with repeated measures on grade confirmed longitudi
 nal changes in the conservation and reconciliation scores. Conservation
 scores increased dramatically with age, F( 1, 39) = 411.19, ρ < .001.

 4Only analyses comparing the W/B MRA measures to the PRAM and to measures
 of cognitive skill are reported, because of substantial correlations between and similar
 developmental patterns in the W/B and W/NI MRA scores (median r = .66 and .93 for bias
 and counter-bias, respectively), and the fact that the W/NI PRAM was not administered in
 Grade 3 in the longitudinal sample.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Racial Prejudice

 Conservation scores also increased significantly with age in the cross
 sectional sample. Reconciliation scores increased significantly in the
 longitudinal sample, where by third grade 67% reconciled on both items,
 F( 1, 39) = 23.23, ρ < .001, and increased slightly in the cross-sectional
 sample, F( 1, 82) = 3.30, ρ > .10.

 Longitudinal similarity scores were entered into a 2 (Crade) X 2

 (Between- vs. Within-Race Judgments) ANOVA with repeated measures
 on both factors. Children perceived more similarity both between and
 within race in grade 3 than in kindergarten, F( 1, 44) = 9.1, ρ < .01, and
 at both ages perceived less between-race than within-race similarity,
 F( 1, 44) = 132.1, ρ < .001, but there was no significant interaction.
 Results for the cross-sectional sample were similar.

 As with the attitude measures, except for within-race similarity (r =
 .32, ρ < .05), correlations of the cognitive measures from Time 1 to Time
 2 were low and nonsignificant (median r = .09, ns). Thus, changes in
 these measures again reflected predominantly developmental level rather
 than stable individual differences and an analysis of covariance approach
 was precluded (Cohen & Cohen, 1983). Difference scores were calcu
 lated (Grade 3 minus kindergarten) to index changes over time. Only
 change in perceived similarity between races was correlated significantly
 with change in other cognitive measures, namely reconciliation (r = .31)
 and conservation (r = .28), ρ < .05, one4ailed.5

 Relations Between Prejudice and Cognitive Measures

 The second principal objective of the study was to examine changes

 in prejudice in relation to changes in conservation, reconciliation,
 between-race similarity, and within-race similarity. For these analyses,
 the three measures of prejudice which showed unidirectional change
 toward greater tolerance along with reasonable variability were cho
 sen: the B/W PRAM score, the MRA B/W counter-bias index and the
 MRA B/W summary score. Pearson correlations (one-tailed) are shown
 in Table 2. Declines in the PRAM score correlated significantly with
 perceptions of greater similarity between race. Increases in MRA counter
 bias were associated significantly with perceptions of greater similarity
 between races and with increases in reconciliation. Decreases in the
 MRA summary score were associated with increased perceived similarity

 5The two cohorts of Grade 3 children, from the longitudinal and cross-sectional

 samples, were compared on the 15 attitude and social-cognitive measures via MANOVA.
 The only significant differences were in reconciliation, F( 1, 85) = 17.6, ρ < .001; RAC
 positive attitudes to white people, F( 1, 89) = 4.4, ρ < .05; and MRA B/W bias, F( 1, 89) =
 4.0, ρ = .05, where the longitudinal sample was slightly higher, as shown in Table 1.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 between races and decreased perceived similarity within racial groups.
 A Bonferrone correction within each prejudice measure left the relations
 of counter-bias with reconciliation and the summary with perceived
 similarity between and within race significant.6

 Because Katz et al. (1975) emphasized the relation of perceived
 similarity within race to prejudice, associations between these variables
 were examined in both kindergarten and Grade 3. Perceived within-race
 similarity was associated positively with W/B PRAM scores at both ages
 (r = .31 and .33, ρ < .05), with W/B bias in kindergarten, (r = .41,
 ρ < .01), and with the MRA summary score in Grade 3 (r = .35, ρ <
 .05). Perceived within-race similarity was associated negatively with W/B
 counter-bias in third grade, (r = —.28, ρ = .05).

 DISCUSSION

 This study documents that prejudice is high in kindergarten and
 decreases over the early years of middle childhood. Attitudes which
 run counter to prejudice increase with age. At the same time, positive
 evaluations of white people and negative evaluations of black people do
 not change, but continue to exist along with the newly acquired counter
 bias attitudes, providing a more differentiated set of racial attitudes.
 Prejudice and counter-bias attitudes are each associated with several
 changes in social cognitions, including for prejudice perception of more
 similarity between races and less similarity within a race, and for counter
 bias, perception of less similarity between races and greater acceptance
 of racial differences in preference.

 Age Changes in Prejudice

 The high PRAM scores of the kindergarten children clearly negate

 Allport's (1954) view that young children are tolerant. Moreover, their

 ^Multiple regression analyses were conducted in addition, in which changes in the
 PRAM, MRA counter-bias and MRA summary scores were predicted from changes in
 perceived similarity within race, perceived similarity between races, and reconciliation,
 entered simultaneously. PRAM was not predicted significantly, F(3, 36) = 0.21, ns. The
 strongest predictor was perceived similarity between race with beta = —.28, ρ = .10. Both
 counter-bias and the MRA summary score were predicted significantly, F(3, 36) = 3.13 and
 3.47, ρ < .05, with reconciliation contributing significantly to counter-bias, beta = .32, ρ
 < .05, and perceived similarity within race and between race contributing significantly to
 changes in the summary score, beta = .35 and -.33, ρ < .05, respectively. Because our
 interest was in the prediction of changes in prejudice from changes in social-cognitive
 skills taken individually rather than jointly, as a basis for selecting variables for further
 research, bivariate correlations are presented in the text.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Racial Prejudice

 Table 2. Correlations of Prejudice Changes with Changes

 in Cognitions for the Longitudinal Sample (n = 47)

 d PRAM

 d MRA Counter-bias

 d MRA Summary

 Similarity-between —.26*
 Similarity-within .13
 Reconciliation -.21
 Conservation —.11

 .26* -.30**
 -.17 .32**

 .34** -.17
 .07 -.18

 Note. PRAM, Preschool Racial Attitude Measure; MRA, Multi-response Racial Attitude
 Measure; d, change in.
 *p < .05. **p < .01, one-tailed.

 apparent prejudice was not an artifact of the PRAM's restricted response
 format or specific to a particular minority group; on the multiple-response
 MRA measure, kindergartners expressed 50% more bias than counter
 bias to both black people and Native Indians.

 By third grade, prejudice scores were considerably lower, such that

 half the third graders no longer were categorized as prejudiced on the
 PRAM, and their bias and counter-bias MRA scores were more equal.
 Thus, there is a clear decrease in prejudice with age, a conclusion
 consistent with findings of several other studies (Bigler & Liben, 1993;
 Doyle et al., 1988; Katz & Zalk, 1978; Williams et al., 1975).

 The specific nature of age changes in children's racial attitudes is

 evident from the age differences on the MRA measure, on which children
 were free to choose both own- and other-group in their positive and
 negative evaluations. Children showed a considerable increase with age
 in counter-bias, that is, positive evaluations of outgroups and negative
 evaluations of white people. In contrast, bias (i.e., positive evaluations
 of own-group and negative evaluations of other groups) did not change
 with age. Thus, although their ethnocentric bias does not decrease with
 age, children acquire additional attitudes which run counter to prejudice
 (e.g., they think black people possess some good qualities and white
 people possess some bad qualities). Studies which show no change in
 prejudice with age (e.g., Katz et al., 1975) may have utilized measures
 which do not assess counter-bias evaluations.

 The parallel declines in PRAM and MRA prejudice in the longitu

 dinal and cross-sectional samples confirm the conclusion that previous
 cross-sectional findings were due to developmental change not cohort
 differences. In addition, the lack of stability over time in the longitudinal
 measures indicates that racial attitudes, at least in kindergarten children,
 likely reflect current developmental status rather than stable individual
 differences.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 Correlations between the PRAM and the MRA scores indicated that

 the PRAM may reflect different aspects of racial attitudes at different ages.
 The PRAM appears primarily to tap bias at kindergarten and counter-bias
 at Grade 3.

 The Importance of Counter-bias

 The MRA counter-bias index, reflecting attitudes running counter

 to prejudice, shows clear developmental change and is significantly
 related to changes in social-cognitive skills. Additional support for the
 importance of counter-bias in prejudice comes from research by Devine
 (1989) with young adults. Although all of Devine's subjects knew the
 negative stereotype usually attributed to black people, low-prejudiced
 subjects also possessed additional positive beliefs which allowed them
 to inhibit their stereotype. Aboud (1993) reports additional data attesting
 to the validity of the MRA counter-bias score as a measure of tolerance.
 It is associated with several indices of peer relations in the multiracial
 fifth-grade class; for example, inversely with sociometric rejection of
 black people and reports of exclusively same-group chums. Third-grade
 children may cognitively differentiate enough to possess positive eval
 uations of minority group members and negative evaluations of white
 people along with their biased pro-white/anti-minority evaluations. These
 counter-bias evaluations then may allow older children to inhibit auto
 matic biased evaluations during cross-race judgments and interaction.

 One often cited explanation for the decline in prejudice with age is
 that older children mask their true prejudices to please the interviewer
 (e.g., Katz et al., 1975). Logically, social desirability concerns are most
 likely to reduce negative evaluations of black people. However, in the
 present study neither these attitudes nor those towards Native Indians
 declined with age. Furthermore, Doyle et al. (1988) found no correlation
 between prejudice and scores on the Crandall Children's Social Desir
 ability Scale (Crandall, Crandall, & Katkovsky, 1965). Thus, it is unlikely
 that developmental changes in socially desirable responding account for
 the developmental changes observed in prejudice.

 Sociocognitive Correlates of Age Changes in Prejudice

 A more probably explanation for developmental changes in prej
 udice is their relation to developing social-cognitive skills. However,
 the lack of correlation between racial attitude change and changes in
 conservation lends support to the idea that the former is not due simply
 to overall cognitive development. Previous studies that report a relation

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Racial Prejudice

 between conservation and prejudice have been based on cross-sectional,
 not longitudinal, differences (e.g., Clark et al., 1980).

 The relation of prejudice changes to changes in specific social
 cognitive skills, however, combined with the lack of individual stability
 across time in racial attitudes does substantiate the underlying develop
 mental nature of the phenomena. One relation was between increases
 in MRA counter-bias evaluations and reconciliation. Children who im
 proved in their understanding that different racial preferences could both
 be correct had greater increases in attitudes that ran counter to prejudice.
 These findings are consistent with other research linking perspective
 taking and reconciliation to other domains of prosocial thought and be
 havior (e.g., Underwood & Moore, 1982). Our findings support Piaget's
 view that only when perspective-taking includes the reconciliation of
 different perspectives is it accompanied by an understanding that there
 may be some positive qualities in other groups worth liking. Additional
 evidence is provided by the finding that second-grade reconciling chil
 dren are more likely than younger ones to change their racial preference
 ratings, making them less biased, following exposure to the preferences
 of children of different races (Aboud, 1981). Thus, when children accept
 the legitimacy of an outgroup child's preferences, it directly affects their
 own preferences.

 Perception of between-race similarity, which increased with age as
 expected, was related to declines in the PRAM and MRA summary score
 and to increases in the MRA counter-bias score. Thus, the developmental
 tendency to perceive greater similarity between minority-group members
 and white people may be an important factor in seeing positive qual
 ities in the other group, and thus, contributing to prejudice reduction at
 this age.

 Perception of within-race similarity, which was expected to decrease

 with age, instead increased. These results are not inconsistent with Katz
 et al. (1975), who found within-race similarity in second through sixth
 graders to decrease only between fourth and sixth grade, suggesting that
 attention to individual differences may develop later than the ages tested
 here. It is also possible that the present findings are due to the particular
 stimulus materials used. Katz et al. (1975) employed drawings and pho
 tographs identical except for single facial expressions or facial features,
 whereas we used photographs of actual children. With increasing age the
 common racial group label may have contributed to what Katz referred to
 as an "acquired equivalence of racial cues" (p. 142). Whether perceived
 similarity within racial group increases or decreases with age appears to
 be dependent on the ages of the children and the nature of the stimuli
 being judged.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 In the present study, associations between changes in perceived sim

 ilarity within race and racial attitudes were in the predicted direction but
 were significant only for the MRA summary score. In contrast, changes
 in perceived between-race similarity were significantly associated with
 all three developmental measures of racial attitudes, and thus, as pre
 dicted, were more important in accounting for developmental changes
 in racial attitudes.

 Perceived similarity within race was associated with racial attitudes
 at both ages analyzed separately. That is, children who rated same-race
 members as more similar to each other tended to have higher prejudice
 as measured by the PRAM at both ages, by bias at kindergarten, and by
 the MRA counter-bias and summary scores at Grade 3. It is noteworthy
 that within-race perceived similarity was the one social-cognitive mea
 sure that was individually stable from kindergarten to Grade 3. These
 results support Katz and Zalk's (1978) conclusion that perceptual dif
 ferentiation within race is an important individual difference relevant
 to prejudice, even in young children. The extent to which correlates
 of racial attitudes reflect developmental status versus stable individual
 differences may be relevant to the choice of foci and ages at which to
 institute efforts to reduce prejudice.

 In conclusion, this study documents that age-related decreases in

 prejudice primarily reflect increases in attitudes that run counter to prej
 udice rather than a reduction in ingroup bias per se. These changes are
 primarily developmental in nature and related to social-cognitive growth;
 between kindergarten and Grade 3 prejudice is not a stable individual
 difference.

 REFERENCES

 ABOUD, F. E. (1981). Egocentrism, conformity, and agreeing to disagree. Developmental

 Psychology, 17, 791-799.

 ABOUD, F. E. (1988). Children and prejudice. New York: Basil Blackwell.

 ABOUD, F. E. (1993). A fifth grade program to reduce prejudice. In K. McLeod (Ed.),
 Multicultural education (The State of the Art National Study, Report #1). Toronto:
 University of Toronto, Faculty of Education.

 ABOUD, F. E., & MITCHELL, F. G. (1977). Ethnic role taking: The effects of preference

 and self-identification. International Journal of Psychology, 12, 1-17.

 ALLPORT, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Cambridge, MA: Addison-Wesley.

 BIGLER, R., & LIBEN, L. (1993). A cognitive-developmental approach to racial stereotyping

 and reconstructive memory in Euro-American children. Child Development, 64, 1507
 1519.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Racial Prejudice

 BRANCH, C. W., & NEWCOMBE, N. (1986). Racial attitude development among young
 Black children as a function of parental attitudes: a longitudinal and cross-sectional
 study. Child Development, 57, 712-721.

 BROWN, G., & JOHNSON, S. P. (1971). The attribution of behavioural connotations to

 shaded and white figures by Caucasian children. British Journal of Social and Clinical
 Psychology, 10, 306-312.

 CLARK, Α., HOCEVAR, D., & DEMBO, Μ. H. (1980). The role of cognitive development

 in children's explanations and preferences for skin color. Developmental Psychology,
 16, 332-339.

 COHEN, J. Α., & COHEN, P. (1983). Applied multiple regression/correlation analyses for

 the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 CORENBLUM, B., & ANNIS, R. C. (1987). Racial preference and identity in Native and

 White Canadian children. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 19, 254-265.

 CRANDALL, V. G„ CRANDALL, V. )., & KATKOVSKY, W. (1965). A children's social

 desirability questionnaire. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 29, 27-36.

 DAVIDSON, F. N. (1976). Ability to respect persons compared to ethnic prejudice in

 childhood. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 34, 1256-1267.

 DEVINE, P. (1989). Stereotypes and prejudice: Their automatic and controlled components.

 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 5-18.

 DOYLE, A. B., BEAUDET, J., & ABOUD, F. E. (1988). Developmental patterns in the
 flexibility of children's ethnic attitudes. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 19, 3-18.

 GULKO, J., DOYLE, A. B„ SERBIN, L., & WHITE, D. (1988). Conservation skills: A repli

 cated study of order of acquisition across tasks. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 149,
 425-440.

 HOLLINGSHEAD, A. B. (1975). Four-factor index of social status. Unpublished manuscript,

 Yale University.

 KATZ, P. A. (1976). The acquisition of racial attitudes in children. In P. A. Katz (Ed.),

 Towards the elimination of racism. New York: Pergamon Press.

 KATZ, P. Α., SOHN, M., & ZALK, S. R. (1975). Perceptual concomitants of racial attitudes

 in urban grade-school children. Developmental Psychology, 11, 135-144.

 KATZ, P., & ZALK, S. (1978). Modification of children's racial attitudes. Developmental

 Psychology, 14, 447-461.

 KOHLBERG, L. (1969). Stage and sequence: The cognitive-developmental approach to

 socialization. In D. A. Goslin (Ed.), Handbook of socialization theory and research.
 Chicago: Rand McNally.

 LINVILLE, P., FISCHER, G. W., & SALOVEY, P. (1989). Perceived distributions of the
 characteristics of ingroup and outgroup members: Empirical evidence and a computer
 simulation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 165-188.

 MESSICK, D. M., & MACKIE, D. M. (1989). Intergroup relations. Annual Review of Psy

 chology, 40, 45-81.

 NAGATA, D. K. (1985). The relationship between ethnic attitude and egocentrism mea

 sures. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 146, 151-160.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 PIAGET, )., & WEIL, Α. M. (1951 ). The development in children of the idea of the homeland

 and of relations to other countries. International Social Science journal, 3, 561-578.

 RAMSEY, P. (1991). The salience of race in young children growing up in an ail-White

 community. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 28-34.

 TABACHNICK, B., & FIDELL, L. (1989). Using multivariate statistics (2nd ed.). New York:

 Harper.

 UNDERWOOD, B., & MOORE, B. (1982). Perspective-taking and altruism. Psychological

 Bulletin, 91, 143-173.

 WEINHEIMER, S. (1972). Egocentrism and social influence in children. Child Development,

 43, 567-578.

 WILLIAMS, J. E„ BEST, D. L„ BOSWELL, D. Α., MATTSON, L. Α., & CRAVES, D.J. (1975).

 Preschool Racial Attitude Measure II. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 35,
 3-18.

 WILLIAMS, J. E., & MORLAND, J. K. (1976). Race, color, and the young child. Chapel

 Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Tue, 26 May 2020 09:53:25 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

