Marquette University
e-Publications@Marquette

Master's Theses (2009 -)

Dissertations, Theses, and Professional Projects

Parents' Influence on Child Social Self-Efficacy and
Social Cognition

Denise Marie Gardner
Marquette University

Recommended Citation
Gardner, Denise Marie, "Parents' Influence on Child Social Self-Efficacy and Social Cognition" (2011). Master's Theses (2009 -). Paper
116.
http://epublications.marquette.edu/theses_open/116

 

PARENTS’ INFLUENCE ON CHILD SOCIAL SELF-EFFICACY AND SOCIAL 

COGNITION 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by  
 

Denise M. Gardner, B.A. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

A Thesis submitted to the Faculty of the Graduate School,  

Marquette University,  

in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for  

the Degree Master of Science 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Milwaukee, Wisconsin 

 

December 2011 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

ABSTRACT 

PARENTS’ INFLUENCE ON CHILD SOCIAL SELF-EFFICACY AND SOCIAL 

 

COGNITION 

 
 

Denise M. Gardner, B.A. 

 

Marquette University, 2011 

 

 

 

Self-representations, such as self-efficacy, are salient factors in child development.  Self-
efficacy refers to the child’s estimation of his/her ability to successfully complete a given task.  
Self-efficacy develops as children attempt various tasks and receive feedback about their 
performance.  Social self-efficacy, one dimension of self-efficacy, refers to a child’s estimation of 
his/her ability to form and maintain interpersonal relationships.  Previous research has 
demonstrated a relationship between child self-efficacy and parent-child interaction variables.  
Social cognition refers to the manner in which children interpret and analyze social behavior.  
Social cognition develops through children’s interactions with important others and may be 
related to social self-efficacy in that it allows children to create expectations about the reactions 
of others and the outcomes of their own behavior.  The present study will examine the 
development of social self-efficacy and social cognition in the context of the parent-child 
relationship. 

Children ages 8 to 10 and their parents participated in the present study. Parents and 

children completed self-report measures assessing social self-efficacy, parenting style, and self-
esteem.  Parent and child social cognition was measured using the Social Cognition and Object 
Relations Scale-Revised (SCORS-R), which is a structured method of coding responses to the 
Thematic Apperception Test (TAT).  Ratings were made for four social cognitive scales: 
Complexity of Representations of People, Affective Quality of Relationships, Capacity for 
Emotional Investment in Relationships, and Understanding of Social Causality. 

There was a moderate, positive correlation between parent social self-efficacy and child 
social self-efficacy.  These effects were maintained while controlling for the influence of parent 
global self-esteem.  Additionally, there was a strong, positive correlation between parent and 
child scores for Affective Quality of Relationships.  A hierarchical multiple regression model 
containing child gender, age, and sociocognitive scores, and parent social self-efficacy scores 
predicted a significant amount of the variance in child social self-efficacy scores. 

The current study demonstrates a statistically significant relationship between parent 
social self-efficacy and child social self-efficacy.  Significant differences between parent and 
child sociocognitive scores suggest a developmental trajectory of sociocognitive skills.  The 
results of the present study may contribute to a better understanding parental influence on child 
social self-efficacy and social cognition.

i 

 

 
 

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

 
 

Denise M. Gardner, B.A. 

 
 

I would like to thank all those who have supported this research project and my greater 

academic endeavors.  First, I would like to thank the participating families and the staff members 

at the participating schools and parishes.   

 

I would like to extend my appreciation to my committee members, Dr. Astrida Kaugars, 

Dr. John Grych, and Dr. Stephen Franzoi, for their guidance and thoughtful feedback regarding 

this study.  I would especially like to thank my thesis advisor, Dr. Kaugars, for her mentorship 

and guidance throughout the course of this project.   

 

I would like to thank several individuals who have supported me throughout this project 

and my graduate school career.  I would like to thank my family, especially my parents and my 

sister, who have supported and encouraged me through the ups and downs of my graduate school 

career.  I would like to thank Ben, who has supported me from both near and far in my quest to 

complete graduate school.  Finally, I would like thank my classmates, who have provided support 

and companionship throughout all of my graduate school endeavors.     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ii 

 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS………………………………………………………………………...i 
 
LIST OF TABLES……………………………………………………………………………. .....iv 
 
CHAPTER 
 
 
 

I. INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………………........1 

A.  The Development of the Self…………………………………………….......1 

 

B.  Self-efficacy………………………………………………………………….3 

C.  Outcomes of Self-efficacy in Adolescents…………………………………...5 

D.  The Impact of Self-efficacy on Cognition and Behavior…………………….7 

E.  The Impact of Self-efficacy on Child Psychopathology…………………......8 

F.  The Impact of Self-efficacy on Peer Relationships………………………......9 

G.  Parenting Factors and Adolescent Self-efficacy……………………………10 

H.  Object Relations…………………………………………………………….13 

I.  Social Cognition…………………………………………………………….14 

J.  Social Cognition and Object Relations……………………………………..15 

II. RESEARCH METHODS AND DESIGN……………………………………………18 

A.  Participants………………………………………………………………….18 

 

B.  Procedure……………………………………………………………………19 

C.  Measures……………………………………………………………………20 

III. RESULTS……………………………………………………………………………27 

A.  Data Analytic Plan………………………………………………………….27 

 

B.  Participant Descriptive Characteristics…………………………………......27 

C.  Associations Among Demographic Characteristics 

and Variables of Interest……………………………………………………30 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 

D.  Associations Among Parenting Style and Child  

Social Self-Efficacy…………………………………………………………32 

E.  Associations Among Parent Self-Perception Measures 

and Child Social Self-Efficacy……………………………………………...32 

F.  Participant Gender and Ethnicity as Moderators of  

Child Social Self-Efficacy……………………………………………..........33 

 

G.  Associations Among Child Social Cognition 

and Child Social Self-Efficacy……………………………………………...34 

H.  Associations Among Parent Social Cognition   

and Child Social Cognition…………………………………………………35 

 

IV. DISCUSSION………………………………………………………………………..36 

V. LIST OF REFERENCES……………………………………………………………..41 

 

iv 

 

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

LIST OF TABLES 

 
 

Participating Schools and Parishes 

Interrater Reliabilities for SCORS-R Parent Protocols 

Interrater Reliabilities for SCORS-R Child Protocols 

Parent Demographic Characteristics 

Child Demographic Characteristics  

VI.  Means, Standard Deviations, and Ranges of Parent and Child Measures 

VII.  Associations Among Parenting Style, Parent Self-Perception, and Child Social Self-

Efficacy 
 

VIII.  Associations Among Child Social Cognition and Child Social Self-Efficacy 

IX.  Associations Among Parent and Child Social Cognition Scores 

 
 
 
 
 

 

INTRODUCTION 

 

Self-representations, such as self-efficacy, are a salient factor in child development.  Self-

efficacy refers to a child’s estimation of his/her ability to successfully perform a domain-specific 

task (Bandura, 1977, 1997).  Self-efficacy develops experientially and is influenced by feedback 

from important others (Bandura, 1997).   Social self-efficacy is a dimension of self-efficacy that 

refers to a child’s estimation of his/her ability to form and maintain interpersonal relationships 

(Hagedoorn & Molleman, 2006).  Social cognition is an additional interpersonal interaction 

variable, which refers to the manner in which children analyze and interpret social behavior 

(Forrester, 1992).  Similar to self-efficacy, social cognition develops experientially through 

interactions with important others in early childhood (Forrester, 1992).  Both social self-efficacy 

and social cognition are considered to be important components of social interactions and are 

related to numerous interpersonal outcomes for children (Caprara et al., 1998; Caprara, 

Barbaranelli, Pastorelli, & Cervone, 2004; Caprara, Regalia, & Bandura, 2002; Caprara & Steca, 

2007; Downey & Walker, 1989; Hala, 1997; Underwood & Moore, 1982).  Previous research 

examining social self-efficacy has focused on the outcomes in adolescent populations, yet little is 

known about the development of social self-efficacy in younger child populations.  Thus, the 

purpose of the present study is to examine the development of social self-efficacy in middle 

childhood in the context of the parent-child relationship.  Additionally, the current study will 

explore the relationship between child social self-efficacy and social cognition.  Finally, the 

current study will examine the relationship between parent social cognition and child social 

cognition to explore patterns and associated factors.   

 

The Development of the Self 

 

 

Developmental theorists postulate that the self is a product of cognitive construction 

 

(Harter, 1999).  Cognitive representations of the self begin to develop at around 2 years of age 

and are based on child observations, expectations, and social comparisons (Harter, 1999).  Self-

representations develop from basic, concrete descriptions in early childhood to complex, 

relational descriptions in late childhood (Harter, 1999; Damon & Hart, 1988; Rosenberg, 1979).  

The following review will focus on self-representations in middle childhood as this population is 

the focus of the current study.  Self-representations in middle childhood are based on the child’s 

perceived competencies and become increasingly interpersonal in nature (Harter, 1999).  Self-

representations in middle childhood become more negative in comparison to self-representations 

of young children (Harter, 1999).  Harter (1999) theorized that three emerging cognitive skills are 

related to the increase in negative self-representations: 1) the ability to use social comparison to 

modify and construct self-representations, 2) the ability to differentiate between the real and the 

ideal self, and 3) greater development of perspective-taking skills.  Specifically, children 

demonstrate greater reliance on social comparisons with peers to evaluate themselves (Harter, 

1999).   If children find themselves less competent than others, particularly in domains that are 

important to the child, global self-representations may be negatively affected (Maccoby, 1980; 

Moretti & Higgins, 1990; Ruble & Frey, 1991).  Similarly, if children find themselves deficient 

according to their own expectations, self-esteem may decrease (Harter, 1999).  Greater 

development of perspective-taking skills increases the child’s awareness of parent, teacher, and 

peer expectations for his/her competence, making it easier to find deficiencies in one’s own 

competence (Harter, 1999).  Interactions with socializing agents, particularly parents and peers, 

influence the development of the self (Harter, 1999).  Interactions characterized by support, 

approval, and acceptance lead to internalizations of the self as acceptable, competent, and lovable 

(Harter, 1999).  Positive interactions may take the form of reflected appraisals, encouragement, 

and support of mastery efforts (Harter, 1999).  Thus, self-representations in middle childhood are 

increasingly interpersonally-focused and are greatly influenced by feedback from important 

others. 

 

The development of self-representations includes the development of self-efficacy, which 

was previously defined as a self-evaluative construct related to a particular domain (Bandura, 

1977, 1997).  A key component of self-efficacy is social self-efficacy, which was previously 

defined as a dimension of self-efficacy related to the formation of interpersonal relationships 

(Hagedoorn & Molleman, 2006).  Self-efficacy develops similarly to other self-representations 

(i.e. through social comparisons and interactions with significant others) and is a particularly 

salient dimension of the self, especially in later childhood and adolescence (Bandura, 1997).  

Research examining self-efficacy has not focused specifically on the factors influencing the 

development of social self-efficacy and the outcomes related to the construct.  The current study 

proposes to expand upon previous research by examining the impact of parent characteristics on 

the development of child self-efficacy and, more specifically, social self-efficacy.  In addition to 

expansion upon previous research, the current study proposes to examine social cognition in 

parents and their children, an additional factor hypothesized to be related to self-efficacy.  

Previous research on the development of self-efficacy has focused on adolescents and their 

parents; therefore, the following review of the literature will focus on this population.   

 

Self-Efficacy 

Self-efficacy, as described earlier, is a component of Bandura’s social-cognitive theory  

(Bandura, 1977, 1997).  Self-efficacy, as compared to other self-evaluative constructs, is a 

context- or domain-specific cognitive appraisal of capability, rather than an affective global 

judgment of self-worth (Pintrich & Schunk, 2002; Zimmerman & Cleary, 2006).  According to 

Bandura’s (1997) theory, self-efficacy is influenced by four factors: personal mastery 

experiences, vicarious experiences, verbal persuasion, and physiological reactions.  Personal 

mastery experiences refer to an individual’s previous successes or accomplishments with a given 

task and are considered to have the strongest and most consistent influence on self-efficacy 

(Schunk & Meece, 2006).  Vicarious experiences, a form of social comparison, occur when other 

 

individuals model or perform a specific behavior.  Previous research indicates that modeling has 

the strongest impact on self-efficacy when the model is similar to the individual and demonstrates 

coping or adaptation when confronted with errors during task performance (Schunk, Hanson, & 

Cox, 1987; Schunk & Meece, 2006).  Verbal persuasion in the form of encouraging feedback 

from important others, such as parents, teachers, and peers, has been found to positively impact 

self-efficacy if subsequent performance of the task is successful (Schunk & Meece, 2006).  

Finally, physiological indicators of anxiety, such as increased heart rate, may detract from self-

efficacy by signaling to the individual that he/she lacks the capability to perform a task 

successfully (Schunk & Meece, 2006). 

 

 The broad construct of self-efficacy is divided into a number of different dimensions.  

The primary focus of the current study is the dimension of social self-efficacy.  While the 

development of the broad construct of self-efficacy has been examined extensively, information 

on the development of the specific dimension of social self-efficacy is limited.  Similarly, 

research examining outcomes of social self-efficacy has been conducted, yet there is minimal 

research examining influences on the development of social self-efficacy.  However, previous 

research examining similar constructs, such as social competence and social problem-solving, has 

been conducted.  Social competence refers to the generalization of social skills and knowledge in 

social interactions, and social problem-solving refers to the negotiation of peer relationships 

issues (McDowell & Parke, 2009).  These constructs refer to knowledge and ability in social 

interactions, and thus, differ from social self-efficacy, which refers to self-evaluative beliefs.  

Previous research has found that parenting behaviors are among the multiple influences impacting 

the development of children’s social competence (McDowell & Parke, 2009).  In a study by 

McDowell and Parke (2009), parent instruction directed toward social problem-solving was 

related to positive peer outcomes, particularly among younger children (McDowell & Parke, 

2009).  Additionally, the literature suggests that parent provision of social opportunities may 

influence child social competence.  Specifically, children who participate in formal 

 

extracurricular activities have better perspective-taking skills (McDowell & Parke, 2009).  As 

noted earlier, perspective-taking skills are hypothesized to be related to self-representations 

(Harter, 1999).  Parent instruction and provision of social opportunities may be likened to the 

vicarious experience and verbal persuasion elements related to the development of self-efficacy.   

In the same manner in which self-efficacy and social competence develop through vicarious 

experiences and verbal persuasion, so may social self-efficacy develop through parent modeling 

of social behaviors (in the form of direct instruction) and parent encouragement of social 

interaction and involvement.  The current study will examine the associations between parent 

modeling of social behaviors and the development of children’s social self-efficacy.  

 

Outcomes of Self-Efficacy in Adolescents 

 

The self-efficacy literature indicates that self-efficacy is a dynamic construct that changes 

across the course of development (Baldwin & Hoffman, 2002; Davis-Kean et al., 2008).  Self-

efficacy is a particularly salient factor in adolescence as a result of the challenges and new 

experiences created by cognitive, physical, and social changes during this period (Schunk & 

Meece, 2006).  Factors influencing self-efficacy may be related to age, gender, and culture.  

Previous research on developmental changes in self-efficacy has demonstrated that self-efficacy 

declines as children transition to junior high school (Wigfield et al., 1997; Wigfield, Eccles, Mac 

Iver, Reuman, & Midgley, 1991).  Wigfield et al. (1997) found that the decline in children’s 

academic, social, and athletic self-efficacy began in the 7th grade and rebounded about one year 

later.  Research conducted by Davis-Kean et al. (2008) demonstrated that self-efficacy beliefs 

become stronger predictors of behavior as children age, specifically in regards to academic 

achievement and social relationships.   

Previous research examining gender differences in self-efficacy has yielded mixed results 

(Felson & Zielinski, 1989; Nielsen & Metha, 1994; Schunk & Lilly, 1984; Schunk & Meece, 

 

2006).  Research conducted by Christie and Segrin (1998) indicated that self-efficacy is 

influenced by perceived constraints faced in the successful completion of a task.  Gender has been 

identified as one of the perceived constraints that may influence self-efficacy.  Additionally, 

research conducted by Hackett & Betz (1981) hypothesized that sex-role stereotypes were 

influential in the development of self-efficacy.  Specifically, sex-role stereotypes encourage boys 

to be assertive, effective, and task-oriented, while girls are encouraged to be sensitive and 

emotionally expressive.  Further, researchers have hypothesized that the factors contributing to 

self-efficacy development have gender-specific influences (Christie & Segrin, 1998).  For 

example, females may be exposed to fewer vicarious learning experiences of involving 

nontraditional roles and tasks.  Specifically, females are provided with fewer role models, in the 

media and in their personal lives, engaging in nontraditional occupational and education tasks.  

Additionally, females may receive more verbal discouragement when engaging in male-

stereotyped activities, such as careers in mathematics and science, which may contribute to lower 

self-efficacy for those tasks (Christie & Segrin, 1998).   

Previous research has examined the role of traditional masculine and feminine traits in the 

perception of self-efficacy (Christie & Segrin, 1998).  Traditional masculine traits were identified 

as independence and competitiveness, whereas traditional feminine traits were identified as 

kindness and helpfulness.  Researchers found that the presence of traditional masculine traits, 

regardless of participant biological sex, were predictive of perceived self-efficacy in both social 

and non-social tasks (Christie & Segrin, 1998).  Participant biological sex was not related to 

perceived self-efficacy in either task (Christie & Segrin, 1998).  Additionally, researchers have 

postulated that gender differences in self-efficacy may be culturally-based.  Specifically, a study 

conducted by Meece and Scantlebury (in press), as cited by Schunk & Meece (2006), found that 

self-efficacy may be related to the manner in which women are portrayed as less capable than 

men in specific cultures.  Thus, it appears that gender influences societal perceptions of an 

individual’s capabilities, which may influence vicarious experiences and verbal feedback.  

 

Additionally, it appears that traditional gender traits influence individual perceptions of self-

efficacy, but the biological sex is not related to these perceptions.  Further research is necessary to 

develop a more comprehensive understanding of the relationship between gender and self-

efficacy. 

Previous research has established relationships between self-efficacy and children’s 

cognitive, affective, and behavioral experiences.  The following review will introduce specific 

findings related to self-efficacy and child outcomes.   

 

The Impact of Self-Efficacy on Cognition and Behavior 

Previous research on adolescent self-efficacy demonstrates that self-efficacy impacts 

cognitive, affective, and behavioral domains of adolescent functioning (Zimmerman & Cleary, 

2006).  Cognition refers to mental processes and their role in thinking, feeling, and behaving 

(Kellogg, 2003).  Self-efficacy is cognitively constructed and influences thoughts, expectations, 

and behaviors.  Bandura (1997) and Schunk (1995) hypothesized that self-efficacy affects 

individuals’ task choices, effort, and persistence in tasks.  Previous research has demonstrated a 

relationship between self-efficacy, outcome expectations, and task pursuit (Schunk & Meece, 

2006).  Findings indicate that individuals’ expectations about the outcome of specific behaviors 

will lead them to pursue tasks with perceived positive outcomes and to avoid tasks with perceived 

negative outcomes.  A study by Rodebaugh (2006) found that adult self-efficacy ratings for 

public speaking were predictive of attempted and avoided social performance tasks, particularly 

when the individuals were familiar with the task.  The same study found that self-efficacy ratings 

were predictive of individuals’ persistence in a social performance task.  Previous research has 

demonstrated a relationship between academic self-efficacy, motivation, and goal-setting, which 

may impact academic achievement and future career plans (Caprara et al., 2004; Bandura, 2006; 

Davis-Kean et al., 2008).  Several studies have more closely examined the relationship between 

academic self-efficacy and academic achievement and have demonstrated that high academic 

 

self-efficacy was predictive of higher academic achievement for male and female adolescents 

(Caprara et al., 2004; Davis-Kean et al., 2008).  A similar relationship between self-efficacy and 

individual career aspirations has been demonstrated (Bandura, 1997; Betz & Hackett, 1986; 

Hackett, 1995; Lent, Brown, & Hackett, 1994).  

 

The Impact of Self-Efficacy on Child Psychopathology 

Estimates of the prevalence of adolescent depression indicate that between 8% and 18% of 

adolescents display depressive symptomatology, and about 16% are diagnosed with a depressive 

disorder (Jenkins, Goodness, & Burhmester, 2002).  Few etiological models relevant to social 

self-efficacy have been developed to explain the onset and progression of adolescent depression.  

One explanation is offered by a study conducted by Jenkins et al. (2002), which found a 

relationship between particular aspects social self-efficacy (specifically intimate support and 

conflict management) and depressive symptoms.  The intimate support aspect of social self-

efficacy refers to the adolescent’s estimation of his/her ability to obtain companionship, 

emotional support, and approval from friends; the conflict management aspect of social self-

efficacy refers to the adolescent’s estimation of his/her ability to maintain a healthy balance of 

conflict in interpersonal relationships (Jenkins et al., 2002).  The study found that lower perceived 

social self-efficacy in intimate support and conflict management was related to depressive 

symptoms in both male and female adolescents.   

One explanation for the relationship between low self-efficacy and depression is the effect of 

perceived control.  Previous research has demonstrated that individuals with low self-efficacy 

typically have an external locus of control, and so they perceive events as personally 

uncontrollable (Zimmerman & Cleary, 2006).  Silver, Mitchell, and Gist (1995) found that 

individuals with low self-efficacy tend to attribute task failures to uncontrollable factors, which 

may lead to feelings of depression and helplessness.  Another explanation for the relationship 

between adolescent self-efficacy and depression is related to attributional style.  Seligman et al. 

 

(1984) demonstrated a relationship between adolescent social self-efficacy and attributional style.   

Specifically, adolescents who interpreted social information using an internal, global, and stable 

attributional style, as compared to an external, specific, and variable attributional style,were more 

likely to have higher depression scores and lower social self-efficacy. 

 

The Impact of Self-Efficacy on Peer Relationships 

Previous self-efficacy research has examined the relationship between self-efficacy and 

prosocial behavior, defined by Caprara & Steca (2007) as “individuals’ tendency to undertake 

voluntary actions aimed at benefitting others, such as sharing, donating, caring, comforting, and 

helping” (p. 218).  Prosocial behavior contributes to the psychosocial adjustment of children and 

adolescents and can be an important variable in improving social interactions (Caprara & Steca, 

2007).  Prosocial behavior may be related to greater social approval and a decreased likelihood of 

developing depression (Caprara & Steca, 2007).  Previous research has demonstrated that two 

specific types of self-efficacy, affective regulation and interpersonal relationship management, 

are positively related to prosocial behavior in males and females (Capara & Steca, 2007).  Not 

only does self-efficacy contribute to prosocial behavior, but it may enhance individuals’ ability to 

resist engaging in antisocial conduct, which may lead to poor peer relationships (Caprara et al., 

1998; Capara et al., 2002; Caprara et al., 2004).  Higher self-efficacy for resisting peer pressure 

decreases the likelihood of involvement in delinquent activities and substance abuse (Caprara et 

al., 1998, 2002).  The study by Caprara and Steca (2007) found that individuals with higher social 

self-efficacy demonstrated lower levels of problem behavior, particularly among females.  The 

same study found that social self-efficacy was more predictive of these variables than were self-

reported personality characteristics, as indicated by responses representing the five-factor model.        

Given the importance of social self-efficacy beliefs and their potential impact on adolescent 

academic, social, and peer functioning, it is critical to investigate the factors contributing to the 

development of social self-efficacy and the variables that shape its changes across the lifespan.  

 

Specifically, parent characteristics have been found to impact the development of social self-

efficacy. 

 

Parenting Factors and Adolescent Self-Efficacy 

 

Child self-efficacy is influenced by different environments and significant relationships with 

others, including parents, teachers, and peers (Felson & Zielinski, 1989; Nielsen & Metha, 1994; 

Patrick, Hicks, & Ryan, 1997; Schunk & Meece, 2006).  Previous research has demonstrated a 

relationship between family, particularly parenting factors, and child self-efficacy (Whitbeck, 

1987; Schunk & Meece, 2006).  According to Schunk and Meece (2006), the family environment 

created by parents may influence child self-efficacy in numerous ways.  Parents shape the family 

environment by providing children with challenges and new experiences, positive role models, 

and realistic goals and expectations.  Parent expectations and perceptions of children’s abilities 

may influence and shape child self-efficacy (Schunk & Meece, 2006).  Parents communicate their 

expectations for their children through verbal feedback and by the types of experiences they 

encourage or discourage their child to participate in (Eccles et al., 1998).  Parent encouragement 

of child involvement in new and challenging experiences may strengthen child efficacy by 

providing the child with mastery experiences (Eccles et al., 1998).  Previous findings indicating a 

relationship between parent verbal feedback and self-efficacy may apply specifically to social 

self-efficacy.  It is hypothesized that parent verbal feedback and encouragement of social 

interactions and peer relationships may affect the development of social self-efficacy, but these 

relationships have not yet been examined empirically.   

According to social learning theory, child self-efficacy can be influenced by modeling of 

behaviors and attitudes by significant persons in their lives, also referred to as vicarious 

experiences (Bandura, 1977).  According to Whitbeck (1987), child self-efficacy may be 

positively related to parent self-efficacy due to the effects of modeling.  Research also indicates 

 

that children are more likely to imitate a model that they view as nurturing than they are to imitate 

a nonnuturing model (Whitbeck, 1987).  Moreover, parent-child interaction variables, specifically 

support and autonomy-granting, were related to child self-efficacy in two ways (Whitbeck, 1987).  

First, parental support and autonomy-granting communicated a sense of worth and competence to 

the child, which served to enhance self-efficacy.  Second, positive parent-child interaction 

variables enhanced the child’s perception of parenting efficacy, thereby augmenting the effects of 

parent modeling. 

Further information about parent-child interaction variables can be gained by examining 

parenting style characteristics.  According to Baumrind’s (1971) theory, parent style can be 

characterized by three variables: support, reciprocity, and control.  Parental supportiveness is 

defined as parental behavior that “makes the child feel comfortable in the presence of the parent 

and confirms in the child’s mind that he [sic] is basically approved of as a person” (Rollins & 

Thomas, 1979; pp. 320).  Parental reciprocity is defined as a “dyadic synchrony in parent-child 

interactions” (Wahler & Bellamy, 1997; p. 550).  Two types of parental control have been 

identified in the literature: inductive control and coercive control (Whitbeck, 1987).  Inductive 

control refers to the parents attempt to gain “voluntary compliance to parental desires by avoiding 

direct conflict with the child” (Rollins & Thomas, 1979; p. 322).  Use of inductive control allows 

the child to gain a sense of autonomy in decision-making and communicates a sense of parent 

competence in the child (Whitbeck, 1987).  Coercive control refers to an attempt to gain child 

compliance through the use of external force, and is associated with negative self-esteem in 

children (Rollins and Thomas, 1979).  Research examining parenting style has demonstrated that 

among the three parenting prototypes (i.e., authoritative, permissive, and authoritarian; Baumrind, 

1971), authoritative parenting is most strongly related to positive developmental outcomes for 

children (Ang, 2006).  According to previous research, authoritative parenting represents the best 

combination of supportiveness, reciprocity, and control in the parent-child relationship (Ang, 

2006).  A parent’s sense of competence in his/her child may lead to the parent to provide greater 

 

verbal encouragement, thus, enhancing child social self-efficacy.  Previous research has 

demonstrated relationships between authoritative parenting and positive self-perceptions, greater 

self-reliance, and higher academic achievement in children (Ang, 2006).  Additionally, higher 

parent support and lower parent coercive control were related to greater child social competence 

(McDowell & Parke, 2009).  Authoritarian parenting and permissive parenting have been 

associated with negative self-perceptions, higher incidences of substance abuse, and school 

misconduct (Ang, 2006).  In conclusion, parent-child interactions characterized by support and 

autonomy-granting provide children with the encouraging feedback necessary for the 

development of self-efficacy.  Interactions lacking support and autonomy-granting may 

communicate to the child that he/she is not a competent, worthwhile individual.   

When examining the relationship between parenting style and child outcomes, it is important 

to consider parent and child ethnicity.  Previous research has demonstrated that parenting styles 

differ based on the practices that best correspond to the core beliefs of individual cultures (Ho, 

Bluestein, & Jenkins, 2008).   For example, Asian cultures value respect for authority and 

obedience; thus, parenting styles of Asian American parents are typically characterized by high 

levels of control and demandingness (Ho et al., 2008).  Previous research has demonstrated that 

both Asian American and African American parents are more likely to use an authoritarian 

parenting style, whereas Caucasian parents are more likely to use an authoritative parenting style, 

which is characterized by a balance between control and reciprocity (Ho et al., 2008).  Latino 

parents are likely to use a parenting style that is characterized by high levels of control but also 

high levels of warmth and support (Dixon, Graber, & Brooks-Gunn, 2008).  Previous findings 

suggest that Asian American and African American children exposed to authoritarian parenting 

have more positive outcomes than do Caucasian children exposed to authoritarian parenting 

(Dixon et al., 2008).  Further, Asian American children are more likely to interpret high parental 

control and demandingness as an indication of love, involvement, and support (Ho et al., 2008).  

In conclusion, parents belonging to specific ethnic groups are more likely to use parenting 

 

practices that match the values of their particular cultural group, and children belonging to 

specific ethnic groups tend to respond more positively to particular types of parenting styles.  The 

current study will examine the relationship between participant ethnicity, parenting style, and 

social self-efficacy.  Object relations, an additional component of the parent-child relationship, 

will also be examined in the current study.    

Object Relations 

 

Object relations theory, a component of psychoanalytic and psychodynamic theory, describes 

an interpersonal process through which individuals develop the capacity to relate to others, who 

are referred to as objects (Westen, 1991).  It is during the development of object relationships that 

children learn to differentiate between the self and the object (Kernberg, 1976).  Theoretically, in 

order to be considered an object, a particular person must have a significant psychological 

relationship with the individual.  Object relations refers more specifically to attitudes and 

behaviors of an individual toward a particular object (Compton, 1995).   

Object relations theory suggests that children begin to develop object relationships through 

interactions with primary caregivers in the first few weeks of life.  These relationships are 

characterized by the child’s feelings and desires to maintain security and well-being and are 

considered by theorists to be the first foundations in the development of a child’s personality 

(Buckley, 1986).  Aspects of the child-caregiver relationship, such as caregiver behaviors, are 

internalized by the child (Compton, 1995).  Based on continued interactions with the primary 

caregiver, children’s perceptions and memories lead to further development and organization of 

the representational world.  Theorists suggest that children experience two types of interactions, 

pleasurable and unpleasant, and that children attempt to maintain relationships with pleasurable 

objects and to minimize interactions with unpleasant objects.  Pleasurable object relationships 

allow the child to create a more cohesive representational world and lead to greater relational 

stability.  This is also referred to as object constancy (Buckley, 1986).  Children integrate 

 

pleasurable and unpleasant object representations to achieve object constancy, which is 

considered to be achieved by age 3 (Kernberg, 1976).  Children’s representations are thought to 

become more complex with increased interactions with an object.  According to theorists, early 

object relationships provide the child with information that contributes to psychological 

development, including the development of internal regulatory mechanisms and the development 

of the ego (Buckley, 1986).  Object relations theorists suggest that children’s fundamental object 

relations develop before age 5 (Westen, 1991).  The construct of object relations is important to 

understand because early interactions form the foundation of the parent-child relationship, which 

is related to the development to self-efficacy.  Through the early interactions with the caregiver, 

the child learns to develop expectations about him/herself and others, which form the basis of 

future self-representations.  Previous research has linked the development of object relations to 

the development of social cognition. 

Social Cognition 

 

Social cognition refers to the manner in which individuals interpret and analyze human 

action.  Forrester (1992) defines social cognition as an “understanding of complex, purposeful 

social behavior” (p. 2).  Numerous theories about the development of social cognition have been 

generated.  Certain social cognition researchers believe that social knowledge develops similarly 

to other cognitive knowledge and that social cognition is essential to effective social interaction in 

children and adults.  Developmental research suggests that social cognition develops through 

“theory of mind”.  Children develop a system of rules based on social experiences and employ the 

system of rules to predict and explain the actions and thoughts of others.  The system of rules is 

based on children’s beliefs and desires early in life.  Social cognition develops as children’s 

desires are not met and when children learn that beliefs about the world can be false (Forrester, 

1992).  Researchers believe that theory of mind develops around ages 4-5 when children begin to 

learn that beliefs about the world may be false.   

 

A second theory of social cognition suggests that social cognition is based on a child’s 

attachment to primary caregivers, which may affect the child’s perceptions and attitudes in other 

significant relationships (Humfress, O’Connor, Slaughter, Target, & Fonagy, 2002).  Several 

parent factors may put children at risk for the development of poor social cognitive skills, 

including child maltreatment and parent psychopathology.  Researchers posit that these parent 

factors may deprive the child of a positive social role model, thus impeding the development of 

good social cognitive skills (Humfress et al., 2002).  Previous research has also linked social 

cognition to child behavior and adjustment (Downey & Walker, 1989; Hala, 1997; Underwood & 

Moore, 1982).  Specifically, children with better social cognitive skills are more likely to engage 

in prosocial behavior (i.e., any voluntary behavior intended to benefit another; Hala, 1997).  

Children’s ability to perspective-take allows them to gain a better understanding of others’ 

emotional states and reactions, which, in turn, fosters prosocial behavior and empathy 

(Underwood & Moore, 1982).  Additionally, previous research suggests that poor social cognitive 

skills are associated with aggression and rejection by peers (Downey & Walker, 1989).  

  

Social Cognition and Object Relations 

 

Social cognition and object relations both develop through social learning processes in 

which individuals’ interpersonal experiences, particularly with primary caregivers, shape the 

processing of social information (Kelly, 2007).  Social cognition and object relations both rely on 

systems or structures, whether it be a system of rules or an organizational structure, to acquire, 

process, and organize information. Previous research on social cognition and object relations has 

focused primarily on developmental differences in object representations and the relationship 

between object relations and empathy in children (Niec & Russ, 2002; Westen, 1991).  Research 

conducted by Westen (1991) suggests that developmental differences in object relations may be 

viewed from a social cognition context.  Westen (1991) examined four primary object relations 

factors in a population of 2nd and 5th grade children with the purpose of exploring developmental 

 

differences.  The results of the study suggest that developmental differences are present in three 

of the four primary factors, including complexity of representations, understanding of social 

causality, and capacity for emotional investment in relationships.  The fourth factor, the affect in 

relationships, remained stable throughout development.  The results of the study suggest that 

children’s object relations tend to mature as they develop, with the exclusion of affect in 

relationships, which appears to remain stable.  Niec and Russ (2002) found that greater maturity 

in object representations was related to greater levels of child- and teacher-rated empathy.  

Previous research examining object relations in the context of social cognition has demonstrated 

the importance of the development of mature, stable object representations in the achievement of 

positive outcomes for children (Westen, 1991).         

Given that the development of high self-efficacy has been associated with prosocial behavior, 

academic achievement, and effective peer relationships, and poor self-efficacy has been 

associated with depression, behavior problems, and decreased social competence, it is critical to 

understand the factors associated with the development of social self-efficacy.  Additionally, it is 

essential that children develop a sense of social self-efficacy in preparation for the demands of 

adolescence.  Moreover, a greater understanding of the development process may help achieve 

positive child outcomes.  By understanding the relationship between parenting factors and child 

social self-efficacy, it may be possible to target parenting factors in an attempt to improve child 

social self-efficacy and to provide better outcomes for the child.  Additionally, an examination of 

the relationship between parent and child social cognition may lead to a greater understanding of 

the manner in which parents influence child social cognition.  

 

The hypotheses that will be tested in the current study are as follows: 

1.  Parent ratings of parenting style (i.e., authoritarian, permissive, and authoritative) will be 

positively related to child ratings of social self-efficacy, such that parenting styles 

characterized by higher levels of supportiveness, reciprocity, and inductive control (i.e., 

authoritative and permissive) will be associated with higher child social self-efficacy. 

 

2.  Parent ratings of parent social self-efficacy will be positively related to child ratings of 

child social self-efficacy. 

3.  A match between parent and child gender will moderate the relationship between parent 

social self-efficacy and child social self-efficacy, such that same-gender dyads will 

demonstrate stronger associations between parent social self-efficacy and child social 

self-efficacy. 

4.  Participant ethnicity will moderate the relationship between parent social self-efficacy 

and child social self-efficacy. 

5.  Child ratings of child social self-efficacy will be related to child social cognition, such 

that higher ratings of social self-efficacy will be positively related to mature ratings of 

four social cognitive factors (i.e., Complexity of Representations of People, Affective 

Quality of Representations, Emotional Investment in Relationships, and Understanding of 

Social Causality). 

6.  Parent social cognitive skills will be associated with child social cognitive skills. 

7.  Parent social self-efficacy will explain a significant amount of unique variance in 

predicting child social self-efficacy after controlling for parenting style and child global 

self-worth.  

Additional exploratory analyses examined the associations among parent ratings of global 

self-esteem and the variables of interest.  These relationships were examined by controlling for 

parent and child global self-esteem in partial correlations.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Participants  

RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS 

Eligible participants in the current study included children, ages 8-10, and their parent or 

primary caregiver.  Inclusion of children and their parents required that they be able to speak 

English and that they be without any cognitive or developmental delays that may affect reading 

comprehension.   

Recruitment 

Participants were recruited from Catholic elementary schools and parishes in the Milwaukee 

area.  An effort was made by the researchers to recruit from schools with diverse student 

populations from a variety of different neighborhoods.  Overall, 21 schools were contacted, and 

10 schools and one parish participated in the current study.  There was variablity among the 

participating schools in terms of their enrollment from parishes and/or families participating in 

Milwaukee’s Parental Choice Program.  A list of participating schools and the number of students 

from each school is included in Table 1.  Four recruitment methods were used in the present 

study. Eligible families received a letter at school explaining the study and were asked to indicate 

their interest in participation, to include contact information if interested, and to return that 

information to the researcher.  Following each research visit, participating families were given a 

postcard containing information about the study and were asked to distribute the postcard to 

another family with a potential interest in participating.  Additionally, the principal investigator 

contacted the director of the Christian Formation program at Church of the Gesu.  The director 

distributed letters to eligible families enrolled in Child and Family Formation classes on Sunday 

mornings and asked them to indicate their interest in participating following the classes.  Finally, 

the principal investigator attended an open house at one of the participating schools, St. Catherine 

School, and explained the study to eligible families.  Each of the participating schools was 

 

offered a workshop, conducted by the principal investigator, in return for their participation in the 

present study.  Fifty-one families participated in the present study.  

 

Table 1  

Participating Schools and Parishes 

______________________________________________________________________________ 

School/Parish 

Catholic East 

Christ King 

 

 

 

Church of the Gesu 

 

 

 

 

Mother of Good Counsel 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Northwest Catholic (East and West Campus) 

St. Margaret Mary 

St. Mary 

St. Matthias 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

n (%) 

4 (7.8) 

10 (19.6) 

3 (5.9) 

9 (17.6) 

9 (17.6) 

3 (5.9) 

5 (9.8) 

8 (15.7) 

______________________________________________________________________________ 

Procedure 
 

Approval was obtained from the Institutional Review Board at Marquette University.  

Informed consent and assent were obtained for all participants upon arrival at the research visit.  

Participants were given the opportunity to ask questions during the consent procedures.  The 

study materials included two separate sets of questionnaires; one set included all of the measures 

for the child to complete, and the other set included all of the measures for the parent to complete.  

Parents and children completed the study materials separately and alerted the researcher about 

any questions or concerns they had during their participation in the study. 

Parent-child dyads then participated separately in a task, which required them to respond to a 

set of cards depicting pictures of social scenarios.  Parents and children were asked a series of 

 

questions requiring them to explain what was occurring in the pictures and what the individuals in 

the pictures were thinking and feeling. Parent and child responses to the pictures were audiotaped.  

Parent and child responses to the pictures were scored using the Social Cognition and Object 

Relations Scale-Revised (SCORS-R; Westen, 2002).  Upon completion of the study, participants 

were given at $15 gift card to either Target or Pick ‘n Save. 

 

Measures 

Demographic Questionnaire (Parent report) 

     Parents completed a demographic questionnaire with questions on basic demographic 

information about the parent and the child: parent occupation, education, annual income, 

ethnicity, and marital status and child age, gender, and grade in school. 

Self-Perception Profile for Children (SPPC; Harter, 1985; Child report) 

The Self-Perception Profile for Children is a 36-item self-report measure utilized with 

children 8-15 years of age that assesses five domains of self-concept, including scholastic 

competence, social competence, athletic competence, physical appearance, and behavioral 

conduct; the SPPC also contains a measure of global self-worth (Harter, 1985).  Each item 

includes pairs of statements that describe perspectives on particular aspects of self-evaluation 

(e.g., “Some kids wish their body was different, but other kids like their body the way it is”).  

Children were asked to indicate which statement best described them and then to rate how well 

the statement described them on a 4-point Likert scale ranging from “sort of true” to “really true”.  

The scores were then summed with higher scores indicating more positive self-perceptions.   

Favorable levels of internal consistency have been reported with Cronbach’s α ranging from 

.80 to .90 at the subscale level (Harter, 1990).  In the present study, Cronbach’s α were .74 on the 

Athletic and Scholastic scales, .75 on the Global scale, .77 on the Social scale, .79 on the 

Behavioral Conduct scale, and .81 on the Physical Appearance scale.  Test-retest reliability at the 

subscale level has been estimated to range from .40 to .65 at one year to one month intervals 

 

(Harter, 1990).  Scores on the SPPC have demonstrated good convergent validity with parent, 

teacher, and peer ratings and have correlated negatively with symptoms of psychopathology 

(Muris, Meesters, & Fijen, 2003).   

Parental Authority Questionnaire-Revised (PAQ-R; Reitman, Rhode, Hupp, & Altobello, 2002; 

Parent report) 

The Parental Authority Questionnaire-Revised (Reitman et al., 2002) is a 30-item parent-

report measure that assesses parenting style based on Baumrind’s (1971) model of three parenting 

prototypes (i.e., authoritarian, authoritative, and permissive).  Parents completed the PAQ-R and 

were required to use a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly 

agree) to indicate how well each item described their parenting behavior (e.g. “Once family rules 

have been made, I discuss the reasons for the rules with my children” or “I do not allow my 

children to question the decisions that I make”).  Items on each of the subscales were summed 

and total scores on each of the three subscales (i.e., authoritative, authoritarian, and permissive) 

were examined for the participating parent.  Scores for each parenting style range from 10 to 50 

with higher scores indicating higher levels of that particular parenting style. 

According to Reitman et al. (2002), the PAQ-R subscales demonstrated moderate internal 

consistency, with Cronbach’s α of .72 on the Authoritarian scale, .76 on the Permissive scale, and 

.77 on the Authoritative scale.  In the current study, internal consistencies were α=.52 on the 

Permissiveness scale, α=.55 on the Authoritarian scale, and α= .69 on the Authoritative scale.  

One-month test-retest subscale reliability on the PAQ ranges from .54 to .88.  Previous research 

has demonstrated good discriminant validity among the three subscales (Reitman et al., 2002).  

Additionally, comparative analyses between responses on the PAQ-R and responses on a social 

desirability measure indicated that responses on the PAQ-R did not appear to be adversely 

affected by social desirability bias (Reitman et al., 2002). 

Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSE; Rosenberg, 1979; Parent report) 

     The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale is a 10-item self-report measure utilized with adults that 

 

assesses global self-esteem.  Each item consists of a statement relating to global self-esteem (e.g. 

“On the whole, I am satisfied with myself”).  Parents completed the RSE and were required to use 

a 4-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (“strongly agree”) to 4 (“strongly disagree”) to indicate how 

well each statement described them.  The final score is calculated by first reverse scoring half of 

the items, according to author specifications, and then summing all of the items.  Previous 

research has demonstrated an internal consistency coefficient of .92 and test-retest reliability over 

a two-week period ranging from .85 to .88 (Rosenberg, 1979).  The Rosenberg Self-Esteem scale 

has demonstrated significant correlations with other measures of self-esteem, such as the 

Coopersmith Self-Esteem Inventory (Rosenberg, 1979).  The Cronbach’s alpha for the present 

study is α = .80.   

Scale of Perceived Social Self-Efficacy (PSSE; Smith & Betz, 2000; Parent report) 

The Scale of Perceived Social Self-Efficacy is a 25-item measure utilized with adults to 

assess perceived self-efficacy in a variety of social situations.  Each item lists a social activity 

(e.g. “Make friends in a group where everyone else knows each other” or “Start a conversation 

with someone you don’t know very well”).  Parents completed the PSSE and were required to use 

a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (no confidence) to 5 (complete confidence) to indicate their 

level of self-efficacy for a particular task.  The final score is calculated by summing all of the 

items.  Previous research has demonstrated an internal consistency coefficient of .94 and test-

retest reliability over a three-week interval ranging from .68 to .86 (Smith & Betz, 2000).  In the 

current study, the PSSE demonstrated acceptable reliability (Cronbach’s α= .95).  Smith and Betz 

(2000) demonstrated that the PSSE is significantly correlated with other measures of social self-

efficacy, such as the Social Confidence Scale of the Skills Confidence Inventory (r = .62 for 

males; r = .53 for females).   

  

Social Cognition and Object Relations Scale-Revised (SCORS-R; Westen, 2002) 

     The Social Cognition and Object Relations Scale-Revised is a structured method of coding 

 

responses to the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT).    The original version of the SCORS was 

developed by Westen and colleagues in 1995.  The SCORS was originally rated according to a Q-

sort procedure and included four primary scales.  The original SCORS was revised to create the 

SCORS-R, which can be used to examine five social cognitive scales including Complexity of 

Representations of People, Affective Quality of Representations, Emotional Investment in 

Relationships, Emotional Investment in Values and Moral Standards, and Understanding of 

Social Causality (Westen, 2002).  The TAT consists of 31 picture cards; 14 of which depict social 

and interpersonal situations.  The cards are specifically designed for particular age and gender 

groups.  Individuals are asked to tell a story based on the situation depicted in each picture.  Per 

recommendations offered by Westen (2002) and Hilsenroth, Stein, and Pinsker (2007), parents 

and children in the current study were presented with six recommended TAT cards, and each 

parent and child told six stories.  The current study utilized SCORS-R coding guidelines to 

evaluate responses to the following TAT cards: 1, 3BM, 4, 7GF or 7BM, 10, and 13B.  Card 7 

has two gender-based versions (GF for girls/females and BM for boys/males), and an appropriate 

card was administered based on participant gender.  Parents and children were asked four specific 

questions concerning what was happening in the picture, what led up to the situation, what the 

people in the picture were thinking and feeling, and what the outcome of the situation would be. 

Responses were recorded during the administration and later transcribed and scored. 

According to the guidelines outlined by Hilsenroth et al. (2007), each response was coded 

according to a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (least mature) to 7 (most mature) for the four 

primary scales of interest (i.e., Complexity of Representations of People, Affective Quality of 

Representations, Capacity for Emotional Investment in Relationships, and Understanding of 

Social Causality).  Participant scale scores were derived by computing a mean score for each 

TAT card across all raters.  The mean scores were then collapsed across all cards to create a 

single score for each of the four sociocognitive factors.  Specifically, four sociocognitive factor 

scores were computed for both parent and child participants.   

 

The principal investigator and two research assistants were trained using the training 

methods outlined by Westen (2002) and Hilsenroth et al. (2007).  Raters were introduced to the 

theoretical premise of the measure and the scoring criteria for each of sociocognitive factors.  

Each week raters were given practice protocols to score independently.  Following independent 

scoring, raters met weekly to discuss scoring differences and refine scoring criteria.  Raters 

scored a total of 20 practice protocols before beginning to score responses from the current study.  

For the practice protocols, all three raters were within 1 point of the ideal score for 90% of the 

parent and child protocols.  Interrater reliability calculated using intraclass correlation coefficients 

ranged from .21 to .89 for the practice protocol scoring.  Following the training sessions, six 

additional reliability meetings were held to continue to improve upon scales that had low 

interrater reliability.   

 

For the current study, the scoring was divided among three raters: the principal 

investigator (Rater 1), an undergraduate research assistant (Rater 2), and a graduate research 

assistant (Rater 3).  Rater 1 scored all of the parent and child protocols.  Rater 2 scored 49% of 

the parent protocols and 33% of the child protocols.  Rater 3 scored 17% of the parent protocols 

and 10% of the child protocols.  A total of 17% of parent responses and 10% of child responses 

were coded by all three raters, 49% of parent responses and 33% of child responses were coded 

by two raters, and 100% were coded by at least one rater.  For the first six participants, an attempt 

was made to blind the raters to the identity of the participant by assigning protocols based on 

interaction with participants at the data collection (i.e., research assistant working with the parent 

rated the child’s protocol).  However, this strategy was discontinued due to research assistant 

unavailability.  Thus, the protocols were rated by the individuals who administered the tasks.      

Previous research has demonstrated good psychometric properties of the SCORS when used 

with child and adolescent populations.  Research conducted by Niec and Russ (2002) examining 

child social cognition demonstrated an uncorrected reliability coefficient of the SCORS-Q 

ranging from .80 to .98.  The same study found good convergent validity between SCORS-Q 

 

scores and teacher ratings of empathy and helpfulness.  Research conducted by Tuber (1992) 

demonstrated good convergent validity between the SCORS and other measures of object 

relations, including the Mutuality of Autonomy Scale of the Rorschach.   

For the current study, interrater reliability was calculated using percent agreement and 

intraclass correlation coefficients.  An examination of percent agreement among Rater 1 and 

Rater 2 found that 95-98% of parent protocols and 89-100% of child protocols were within a one-

point agreement for the four scores.  Interrater reliability was examined for all three raters 

together as well as for each pair of raters (i.e., Raters 1 and 2, Raters 2 and 3, and Raters 1 and 3).  

Using intraclass correlation coefficients, interrater reliability ranged from .30 to .88 for parent 

protocols and from .01 to .84 for child protocols.  There are several reasons why the interrater 

reliability for the current study is unexpectedly low.  First, Rater 3 scored less than 20% of the 

practice protocols, which may have influenced the reliability of rater pairs that included Rater 3.  

Additionally, Rater 3 discontinued scoring early in the study, while Rater 1 and Rater 2 likely 

became more comfortable with the scoring criteria as the study continued.  Second, observations 

of individual scores indicated limited variability in scores, with most scores falling in the middle 

of the distribution.  Therefore, scores falling outside of the middle of the distribution may have 

influenced reliability.  Greater variability was observed in the parent scores, which may have 

contributed to the higher interrater reliability in the parent sample.  Due to the fact that Rater 3 

scored less than 20% of the data and demonstrated poor interrater reliability with Rater 1 and 

Rater 2, the scoring data from Rater 3 was removed from the dataset prior to conducting the 

analyses.  Results of the reliability analyses are summarized in Tables 2 and 3.       

Table 2 
 
Interrater Reliabilities for SCORS-R Parent Protocols___________________________________ 
 
Parent Scores____________________________________n_________           ICC___________ _ 
 
 
Complexity of Representations of People 
 
 

All Coders 

        .61  

52 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

149 
52 
52 

52 
149 
52 

52 
149 
52 
52 

52 
149 
52 
52 

       .67 
       .61 
       .76 

        .55  
        .46 
        .63 

        .76 
        .79  
        .74  
        .60 

        .88 
        .84  
        .81 
        .78 

Raters 1 and 2 
Raters 2 and 3 
Raters 1 and 3 

All Coders 
Raters 1 and 2 
Raters 2 and 3 

All Coders 
Raters 1 and 2 
Raters 2 and 3 
Raters 1 and 3 

All Coders 
Raters 1 and 2 
Raters 2 and 3 
Raters 1 and 3 

 
 
 
 
Affective Tone of Relationships 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capacity for Emotional Investment 
 
 
 
 
 
Understanding of Social Causality 
 
 
 
______Raters 1 and 3____________________________52___________       .30______________  
 
 
 
Table 3 
 
Interrater Reliabilities for SCORS-R Child Protocols____________________________________ 
 
Child Scores____________________________________n_________           ICC_____________ 
 
 
Complexity of Representations of People 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Affective Tone of Relationships 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capacity for Emotional Investment 
 
 
 
 
 
Understanding of Social Causality 
 

All Coders 
Raters 1 and 2 
Raters 2 and 3 
Raters 1 and 3 

All Coders 
Raters 1 and 2 
Raters 2 and 3 
Raters 1 and 3 

All Coders 
Raters 1 and 2 
Raters 2 and 3 
Raters 1 and 3 

      .01   
      .52 
      .51 
      .51 

      .84 
      .44 
      .77 
      .78 

      .51 
      .44 
      .57 
      .08 

 
30 
101 
30 
30 

30 
101 
30 
30 

30 
101 
30 
30 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

All Coders 

30 

      .59 

 

Raters 1 and 2    
 
Raters 2 and 3 

 
 
______Raters  1 and 3____________________________30___________     .20______________ 
 
 

      .52   
      .74 

101 
30 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

RESULTS 

Data Analytic Plan 

The distributions of scores were assessed for skewness and kurtosis.  Results of the 

analyses indicated no concerns regarding the skewness and kurtosis of the variables of interest.  

The proposed hypotheses were examined using Pearson product-moment correlations (i.e., 

Hypotheses 1, 2, 5, and 7) and hierarchical multiple regressions (i.e., Hypotheses 3, 4, and 6).   

Participant Descriptive Characteristics 

 

Analyses were based on the full sample of 51 participants with the exception of the data 

from the Parent Information Form, specifically household income (n = 49) and child’s ethnicity 

(n = 49), and the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (n = 50), which had missing data.  Due to the 

somewhat sensitive nature of some of the items on the Parent Information Form, participants 

were given the option of skipping selected items if they did not feel comfortable disclosing 

certain information.  Missing items at the subscale level on the Perceived Scale of Social Self-

Efficacy and the Parental Authority Questionnaire were replaced using mean substitution.   

 

Descriptive statistics for parents’ demographic characteristics are displayed in Table 4.  

As expected, the participating parents were primarily mothers (90.2%), but the sample also 

included five fathers (9.8%).  There was a wide variability in the ages of parents with a range of 

26 to 50 years.  The sample was predominantly Caucasian (86.3%) and well educated (i.e., 82.4% 

had at least a 4-year college degree).   There was a wide variability in the household income with 

30.6% of the sample earning less than $60,000 and 22.5% earning greater than $120,000. 

 

Descriptive characteristics for children’s demographic characteristics are displayed in 

Table 5.  The sample was 58.8% male with a mean age of 8.9 years.  The sample was 

 

predominantly Caucasian (69.4%) with 20.4% identifying as bicultural/multicultural, 6.1% 

identifying as Latino/Hispanic, and 4.1% identifying as African American.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.9 

9.8 

90.2 

26-50 

Range   

M  (SD)  

40.3 (5.5) 

High School 

Some College 

Biological Father 

Biological Mother 

Bachelor’s Degree 

Associate’s Degree 

Table 4 
 
Parent Demographic Characteristics 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
n (%)________ 
 
Participating Primary Caregiver 
 
 
 
 
 
Age (in years) 
 
Highest Level of Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ethnicity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marital Status 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Bicultural/Multicultural  

African American 

Master’s Degree 

Doctoral Degree 

Separated  

Caucasian 

Married  

Latino   

54.9 

21.6 

86.3 

76.5 

13.7 

5.9 

5.9 

5.9 

5.9 

2.0 

5.9 

3.9 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Divorced 
 
Never Married   

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.9 

 

 

 

 

 

$61,000-$90,000 

$31,000-$60,000 

Less than $30,000 

$91,000-$120,000 

$121,000-$150,000 

 
Household Income 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______Greater than $150,000 
 
 
 
Table 5 
 
Child Demographic Characteristics 
 
 
 
Gender  
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

22.4 

8.2 

16.3 

30.6 

8.2 

14.3 

______ 

 
 
M  (SD)  

 
 
Range   

 
______ 
n (%)________ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.9 (.98) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
6-11 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

58.8 

41.2 
 

 

 

69.4 

4.1 

6.1 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Bicultural/Multicultural  
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 

20.4 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
Male 
 
 
Female  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Age (in years) 
 
Ethnicity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Latino   

Caucasian 

African American 

 

Associations Among Demographic Characteristics and Variables of Interest 

 

The descriptive data for the measures used in the present study is displayed in Table 6.  

Preliminary analyses examined the relationships among participant demographic characteristics 

(i.e., age, gender, ethnicity, education, and income) and the variables of interest.  For the child 

participants, there was a moderate, positive relationship between child age and child social self-

efficacy, r = .28, p = .04, which indicates that older children had higher social self-efficacy.  A 

one-way between groups analysis of variance was conducted to further explore the impact of age 

on levels of social self-efficacy.  Participants were divided into three groups according to their 

age (Group 1: 6-8 years old, n = 16; Group 2: 9 years old, n = 20; Group 3: 10-11 years old, n = 

15).  There was a statistically significant difference in the social self-efficacy scores for the three 

age groups, F (2, 48) = 3.36, p = .04.  Post hoc comparisons using the Tukey HSD test indicated 

that the mean score for Group 1 (mean = 16.05, SD = 5.25) was significantly lower than Group 3 

(mean = 19.87, SD = 4.03).  Group 2 (mean = 16.95, SD = 3.56) did not differ significantly from 

either Group 1 or Group 3.  Next, an independent samples t-test was conducted to compare the 

social self-efficacy scores for male and female children.  There was a trend toward a significant 

difference in scores for males and females, t (49) = 1.89, p = .07, indicating that, on average, 

males tended to have higher social self-efficacy scores (mean = 18.49, SD = 4.31) than females 

(mean = 16.14, SD = 4.46).  Finally, an independent samples t-test was conducted to compare the 

SCORS-R sociocognitive scores for male and female children.  Results indicated a significant 

difference in scores for males and females on two of the sociocognitive factors, namely 

Complexity of Representations of People, t (48) = -2.39, p = .02 (males, mean = 2.76, SD = 0.41; 

females, mean = 3.00, SD = 0.27), and Understanding of Social Causality, t (48) = -2.20, p = .03 

(males, mean = 2.66, SD = 0.46; females, mean = 2.92, SD = 0.31).  Females were rated as 

having more developed descriptions of internal states and a more developed understanding of 

cause and effect in interpersonal relationships than males.   

 

 

Among the parents, there was a moderate, negative relationship between parent age and 

authoritative parenting style.  Specifically, as parent age increased, parents were significantly less 

likely to report using an authoritative parenting style, r = -.34, p = .02.  No other significant 

relationships were found between parent demographic characteristics and the variables of interest. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.14 

18.63 

SD          

Mean          

Permissive Parenting 

Authoritative Parenting   
 
Authoritarian Parenting  

 
________________________________________________________________________

 
Table 6 
 
Means, Standard Deviations, and Ranges of Parent and Child Measures 
 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Parent Self-Report Questionnaires 
 
 
Parental Authority Questionnaire (PAQ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Perceived Social Self-Efficacy (PSSE) 
 
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSE) 
 
Child Self-Report Questionnaires 
 
Self-Perception Profile for Children (SPPC) 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Cognition and Object Relations Scale – Revised (SCORS-R) 
 
 
 

Complexity of Representations of People  

Social Self-Perception Score 

Global Self-Worth Score 

91.68        

16-39 

11-25 

24-45 

19-29 

27.07 

37.27 

16.88 

14.97 

17.48 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6-24 

4.21 

3.81 

4.52 

3.96 

    

3.35 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

19.9 

7-24 

 

 

 

Range         

 

47-125         

 
 
 

Parent   
 
Child 

 

 

 

 

 

Affective Tone of Relationships  

Parent   
 
Child 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.25 

2.86 

4.06 

4.03 

 

 

 

 

.41 

.38 

.42 

.43 

 

 

 

 

2.5-4.7 

2.0-3.5 

3.0-5.0 

3.0-5.0 

 

 
 

 

Capacity for Emotional Investment in Relationships 

 
Parent   
 
Child 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Understanding of Social Causality  

Parent   

 

 

 

 

 

3.23 

3.02 

3.19 

 

 

 

.45 

.34 

.46 

 

 

 

2.2-4.2 

2.5-3.8 

2.3-4.7 

 

Child 

 

 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 

1.5-3.3 

2.77 

.42 

 

 

 

 

 

Associations Among Parenting Style and Child Social Self-Efficacy 

 

To examine the hypothesized associations among parenting style and child social self-

efficacy, bivariate correlations were conducted, and the results are displayed in Table 7.  There 

was no support for the proposed hypotheses regarding parenting style and child social self-

efficacy.  Results revealed small effects, but the correlations were not statistically significant.   

 

Associations Among Parent Self-Perception Measures and Child Social Self-Efficacy 

 

As proposed in the second hypothesis, there was a significant, positive relationship 

between parent social self-efficacy and child social self-efficacy, r = .32, p = .02.  To examine 

whether social self-efficacy is distinct from self-esteem, a partial correlation was used to explore 

the relationship between parent social self-efficacy and child social self-efficacy while controlling 

for parent self-esteem.  There was a moderate, positive correlation between parent social self-

efficacy and child social self-efficacy after controlling for parent self-esteem, r = .33, p = .02.  An 

additional partial correlation was used to explore the relationship between parent social self-

efficacy and child social self-efficacy while controlling for child global self-worth.  There was a 

moderate, positive correlation between parent social self-efficacy and child social self-efficacy 

after controlling for child global self-worth, r = .32, p = .03.  Parent self-esteem was not 

 

statistically significantly related to parent social self-efficacy, r = .11, n.s., or child social self-

efficacy, r = -.06, n.s.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Child Social Self-Efficacy_ 

 
Table 7 
 
Associations Among Parenting Style, Parent Self-Perception, and Child Social Self-Efficacy 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Measures 
 
1. PAQ Authoritative 
 
2. PAQ Authoritarian 
 
3. PAQ Permissive 
 
4. Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale  
 
5. Scale of Perceived Social Self-Efficacy 
________________________________________________________ 
Note: PAQ = Parental Authority Questionnaire  
n = 51 for all correlations 
* p < .05 
 

.32* 

-.10 

-.21 

-.15 

.12 

 

 

 

 

 

Participant Gender and Ethnicity as Moderators of the Associations Between Parent and 

Child Social Self-Efficacy 

 

A hierarchical multiple regression was conducted to examine the third hypothesis, 

regarding whether same-gender parent-child dyads moderated the relationship between parent 

social self-efficacy and child social self-efficacy.  Parent-child dyads were coded as either same 

gender (n = 18) or different gender (n = 33).  Based on previous results, parent social self-efficacy 

was entered first in the model, followed by parent-child gender match.  The overall model was 

significant, F (3, 47) = 3.46, p = .02, and explained 12.8% of the variance in child social self-

efficacy prior to adding the interaction term.  Parent social self-efficacy accounted for 8.2% of the 

variance in child social self-efficacy and the inclusion of parent-child gender match in the model 

resulted in an additional 7.5% of the variance being explained.  The interaction term of same 

gender dyads and parent social self-efficacy was tested, and it was determined that same versus 

 

different parent-child dyads was not a significant moderator of the relationship between parent 

social self-efficacy and child social self-efficacy.  An independent samples t-test was conducted 

to compare the child social self-efficacy scores for same gender and different gender dyads.  

There was a trend toward a significant difference in scores for same versus different gender 

dyads, t = -1.98, p = .05, indicating that, on average, children in different gender dyads reported 

higher social self-efficacy (mean = 18.41, SD = 4.15) than did children in same gender dyads 

(mean = 15.89, SD = 4.73). 

 

    Due to the fact that the sample was predominantly Caucasian and demonstrated low 

representation from ethnic minority group members, the fourth hypothesis was not examined. 

 

Associations Among Child Social Cognition and Child Social Self-Efficacy 

 

Analyses examining the fifth hypothesis revealed a moderate, negative correlation 

between child social self-efficacy and Capacity for Emotional Investment in Relationships, r = -

.36, p = .01.  The remaining three sociocognitive variables, Complexity of Representations of 

People, Affective Quality of Relationships, and Understanding of Social Causality, were not 

related to child social self-efficacy (see Table 8). 

Table 8 
 
Associations Among Child Social Cognition and Child Social Self-Efficacy 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Social Cognition Factors___________________________________Social Self-Efficacy_______ 
Child 
 
1. Complexity of Representations of People 
 
 
2. Affective Tone of Relationships 
 
3. Capacity for Emotional Investment in Relationships 
 
4. Understanding of Social Causality 
 
 
 

-.36* 

-.28  

-.19 

-.01 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Parent 
 
1. Complexity of Representations of People 
 
2. Affective Tone of Relationships 
 
3. Capacity for Emotional Investment in Relationships 
 
4. Understanding of Social Causality 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
Note: n = 50 for all correlations 
* p < .05 
**p < .01 

.45** 

-.21 

-.10 

.12 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Associations Among Parent Social Cognition and Child Social Cognition 

 

There was a strong, positive correlation between parent and child scores on the Affective 

Quality of Relationships factor, r = .45, p = .001 (see Table 8).  However, the other three parent 

and child sociocognitive factor scores were not significantly related.  Paired samples t-tests 

demonstrated statistically significant differences between parent and child scores on three of the 

sociocognitive factors, specifically Complexity of Representations of People, t (49) = 4.42, p < 

.001, Capacity for Emotional Investment in Relationships, t (49) = 3.27,  p = .002, and 

Understanding of Social Causality, t (49) = 4.81, p <.001 (see Table 8). 

The seventh hypothesis was not examined because parenting style and child global self-

worth were not significantly related to child social self-efficacy.  However, in order to better 

understand the factors that may impact development of child social self-efficacy, a hierarchical 

multiple regression was used to assess how child age and child sociocognitive scores may 

influence child social self-efficacy.  Based on previous findings, child age was entered in the first 

step, followed by child sociocognitive scores (Capacity for Emotional Investment), and parent 

social self-efficacy.  The overall model was significant, F (3, 46) = 6.02, p = .002, and explains 

28.2%   of the variance in child social self-efficacy.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

DISCUSSION 

 

The current study examined the relationships between parent social self-efficacy, social 

cognition, and parenting style and child social self-efficacy.  Specifically, it was hypothesized 

that higher levels of social self-efficacy and more developed social cognition in parents would be 

positively related to their children’s level of social self-efficacy and maturity of social cognition.  

Overall, a variety of parent and child characteristics were associated with child self-reported 

social self-efficacy. 

 

Some interesting findings from the current study include the associations among 

participant demographic variables and the variables of interest.  Specifically, older children were 

more likely to have higher social self-efficacy; this finding is consistent with previous research 

indicating that children’s self-efficacy typically increases with age into early adolescence 

(Wigfield et al., 1991; 1997).  Previous research on the relationship between gender social self-

efficacy development has yielded inconclusive results (Felson & Zielinski, 1989; Nielsen & 

Metha, 1994; Schunk & Lilly, 1984; Schunk & Meece, 2006).  In the present study, female 

children demonstrated greater maturity in interpreting the internal states of others and in 

understanding cause and effect in interpersonal relationships.  Greater maturity in sociocognitive 

skills may allow female children to more accurately interpret the emotions of others and better 

understand how their own and others’ behavior is related to outcomes in social interactions.  

These skills, which are likely socialized, may contribute to positive peer interactions and assist 

female children in maintaining interpersonal relationships.  Additionally, a regression model 

including child age, child gender, and child social cognition predicted 28.2% of the variance in 

child social self-efficacy.  This finding highlights the importance of examining demographic 

variables that may be related to the development of social self-efficacy. 

 

Contrary to hypotheses, there was a lack of meaningful associations between parenting 

style and child social self-efficacy.  In the current study, the Parental Authority Questionnaire 

 

subscales demonstrated unexpectedly low internal consistency, which may have impacted the 

ability of the measure to accurately assess the different parenting styles.  Upon further 

examination of the data, it was observed that many parents had written exceptions and 

stipulations on the questionnaire, which may indicate that parents were uncertain or not confident 

in their responses.  This may have contributed to the low internal consistency observed in the 

measure.  A measure of child-reported parenting style may have been useful to provide an 

additional perspective of parenting style.  Finally, previous research has reported that the Parental 

Authority Questionnaire demonstrates good psychometric properties in Caucasian populations, 

but demonstrates less acceptable psychometric properties in minority populations (Reitman et al, 

2002).  Thus, its use with a variety of populations should be investigated further. 

 

Notably, there was a statistically significant association between parent social self-

efficacy and child social self-efficacy, and the relationship remained intact even while controlling 

for the influence of parent self-esteem and child global self-worth.  Additionally, parent self-

esteem was not related to parent social self-efficacy or child social self-efficacy.  This finding is 

particularly compelling because parents and children each reported on their own social self-

efficacy.  Additionally, this finding provides support for the differentiation of self-esteem and 

social self-efficacy as separate constructs and highlights the importance of assessing socially-

specific self-perceptions in addition to perceptions of global self-worth. 

 

Interestingly, children in different gender dyads reported higher social self-efficacy than 

children in same gender dyads.  This finding is contrary to previous research, which has 

demonstrated that children are more likely to imitate a model that they perceive as similar to 

themselves (Schunk, Hanson, & Cox, 1987; Schunk & Meece, 2006).  However, previous 

research has also demonstrated that children are more likely to imitate a model that they perceive 

as nurturing, which is likely embodied in the parental figure (Whitbeck, 1987).  Since the 

majority of parent participants in the present study were mothers (~ 90%), the study was limited 

in the ability to truly examine the influence of same- versus different-gender dyads on child social 

 

self-efficacy.  Contrary to hypotheses, none of the participant demographic factors moderated the 

relationship between parent social self-efficacy and child social self-efficacy.  Since these 

associations have not been examined in previous studies, the present study provides impetus for 

additional investigation in future research. 

 

There were few associations between children’s social cognition and social self-efficacy.  

Three of the child sociocognitive factors were unrelated to child social self-efficacy, while the 

other factor was moderately, negatively related to child social self-efficacy.  The unexpected 

findings may be a result of the multi-method assessment of social self-efficacy and social 

cognition.  Social self-efficacy was assessed using a face valid self-report questionnaire, which 

may have resulted in inaccurate reporting and inflated responses.  Social cognition was assessed 

using a performance-based measure, which may have made it more difficult to understand the 

purpose of the measure and to modify responses.  Additionally, these findings highlight the fact 

that perceptions of interpersonal efficacy may be largely different from the developmental 

maturity of cognitions in interpersonal interactions.  For example, children may rate themselves 

as being highly efficacious in social interactions, yet they do not have the sociocognitive skills to 

accurately assess others’ perceptions of themselves and their behavior.  Future research should 

examine additional factors, such as peer status, to better understand the relationship between 

social self-efficacy and social cognition. 

 

There was a strong, positive association between parent and child scores for only one of 

the sociocognitive factors, namely the Affective Quality of Relationships factor.  Interestingly, 

significant developmental differences were observed between parent scores and child scores for 

the other three factors, suggesting a possible developmental trajectory in the maturation of social 

cognition.  This finding is consistent with previous research conducted by Westen (1991), which 

found developmental differences for each of the sociocognitive factors with the exception of 

Affective Quality of Relationships.   

 

 

There were several limitations to the current study.  One of the limitations of the study is 

limited racial/ethnic diversity in the study sample.  While an effort was made to recruit 

participants representing a variety of races and ethnicities, the sample was predominantly 

Caucasian, particularly among parents.  This limitation highlights the importance of developing 

and employing different recruitment strategies that may be more appropriate for individuals from 

ethnic minority groups, such as using a face-to-face contact approach (Mendez-Luck, Trejo, 

Miranda, Jimenez, Quiter, & Mangione, 2011).  Another limitation involves the scoring of the 

TAT responses.  While an initial effort was made to ensure the blindness of the raters to the 

participants’ other data, the limited availability of one of the raters required that the other trained 

raters score each of the protocols.  However, this did not appear to be a significant problem due to 

the fact that TAT responses were kept separate from other data.  Additionally, limited variability 

in child scores on the TAT may have influenced reliability.  A final limitation of the current study 

was the poor internal consistency of the PAQ subscales.  

 

The present findings suggest several possibilities for future research.  Further research 

studies could examine the relationships among child social self-efficacy, social cognition, and 

peer group status.  An examination of the relationships among these three constructs would allow 

for a better understanding of the manner in which self-perceptions and interpersonal 

interpretations are related to functioning in peer situations.  Furthermore, future research should 

use additional reporters (e.g. teachers) and methods of gathering information (e.g. behavioral 

observation) to better understand these constructs.  Finally, future research should more closely 

examine the role of age in children’s ability to accurately understand their own self-efficacy.  

More specifically, future research should examine whether or not young children are able to 

accurately assess their own social self-efficacy by using information from their social 

interactions.   

 

The findings of the current study present several important clinical implications.  The 

positive relationship between parent social self-efficacy and child social self-efficacy suggests 

 

that fostering parent social self-efficacy may result in increases in children’s social self-efficacy.  

Programs could focus on the role of parent modeling as a significant influence in child 

development of social self-efficacy.  Additionally, findings from the current study emphasize the 

fact that the match between parent and child gender may not be as important as was previously 

understood, and that both parents likely have an equal influence on their children’s social self-

efficacy.  More specifically, the stereotypical gender traits associated with the task, such as 

having insight into interpersonal relationship functioning, may have a greater influence than the 

parent or child’s biological sex.  For example, social tasks more typically associated with 

feminine traits may lead to higher ratings of social self-efficacy in children who identify more 

strongly with femininity.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

 
 

Ang, R.P.  (2006).  Effects of parenting style on personal and social variables for Asian 

adolescents.  American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 76, 503-511. 

 
Baldwin, S.A., & Hoffman, J.P.  (2002).  The dynamics of self-esteem: A growth-curve analysis. 

Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 31, 101-113. 
 

Bandura, A.  (1977).  Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavior change.  Psychological 

Review, 84,191-215. 
 

Bandura, A.  (1997).  Self-efficacy: The exercise of control.  New York: W.H. Freeman and 

Company. 
 

Bandura, A.  (2006).  Adolescent development from an agentic perspective.  In F. Pajares & T. 

Urdan (Eds.), Self-efficacy beliefs of adolescents (pp. 1-43).  Greenwich, CT: Information 
Age. 

 
Baumrind, D.  (1971).  Current patterns of parental authority.  Developmental Psychology 

Monographs, 4,1-103. 
 

Betz, N.E., & Hackett, G.  (1986).  Applications of self-efficacy theory to understanding career 

choice behavior.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 4, 279-289. 

 
Buckley, P.  (1986).  Essential papers on object relations.  New York: New York University 

Press. 
 

Caprara, G.V., Barbaranelli, C., Pastorelli, C., & Cervone, D.  (2004).  The contributions of self
 

efficacy beliefs to psychosocial outcomes in adolescence: Predicting beyond global 
disposition tendencies.  Personality and Individual Differences, 37, 751-763. 
 

Caprara, G.V., Regalia, C., & Bandura, A.  (2002).  Longitudinal impact of perceived self 

regulatory efficacy on violent conduct.  European Psychologist, 7, 63-69. 
 

Caprara, G.V., Scabini, E., Barbaranelli, C., Pastorelli, C., Regalia, C., & Bandura, A.  (1998).  

Impact of adolescents’ perceived self-regulatory efficacy on familial communication and 
antisocial conduct.  European Psychologist, 3, 125-132. 
 

Caprara, G.V., & Steca, P.  (2007).  Prosocial agency: The contribution of values and self 
efficacy beliefs to prosocial behavior across ages.  Journal of Social and Clinical 
Psychology, 26, 218-239. 

 
Christie, V., & Segrin, C.  (1998).  The influence of self-efficacy and of gender on the 

performance of social and nonsocial tasks.  Journal of Applied Communication  
Research, 26, 374-389. 
 

Compton, A.  (1995).  Objects and object relationships.  In B.E. Moore & B.D. Fine (Eds.), 

Psychoanalysis:The major concepts.  New Haven: Yale University Press. 

 
Damon, W., & Hart, D.  (1988).  Self-understanding in childhood and adolescence.  New York: 

 

Cambridge University Press.   

 
Davis-Kean, P.E., Huesmann, L.R., Jager, J., Collins, W.A., Bates, J.E., & Lansford, J.E.  

(2008).  Changes in the relation of self-efficacy beliefs and behaviors across 
development.  Child Development, 79, 1257-1269.   

 
Dixon, S.V., Graber, J.A., & Brooks-Gunn, J.  (2008).  The role of respect for parental authority 
 
 
 
Downey, G. & Walker, E.  (1989).  Social cognition and adjustment in children at risk for  

and parenting practices in parent-child conflict among African American, Latino, and  
European American families.  Journal of Family Psychology, 22, 1-10. 

psychopathology.  Developmental Psychology, 25, 835-845. 

 
Eccles, J.S., Wigfield, A., & Schiefele, U.  (1998).  Motivation to succeed.  In N. Eisenberg (Ed.),
 
 
 
Felson, R.B., & Zielinski, M.A.  (1989).  Children’s self-esteem and parental support.  Journal of 

Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development
(5th ed., pp. 1017-1095).  New York: Wiley. 

Marriage and the Family, 51, 727-735.   
 

Forrester, M.A.  (1992).  The development of young children’s social-cognitive skills.  East 

Sussex: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   

Journal of Vocational Behavior, 18, 326-339.   

 
Hackett, G., & Betz, N.  (1981).  A self-efficacy approach to the career development of women.   
 
 
Hackett, G.  (1995).  Self-efficacy in career choice and development.  In A. Bandura (Ed.), Self 
efficacy in changing societies (pp. 232-258).  New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 

Hagedoorn, M. & Molleman, E.  (2006).  Facial disfigurement in patients with head and neck 

cancer: The role of social self-efficacy.   Health Psychology, 25, 643-647. 
 

East Sussex: Psychology Press.   

Hala, S.  (1997).  The development of social cognition: Studies in developmental psychology. 
 
 
Harter, S.  (1985).  Manual for the Self-perception Profile for Children. Denver, CO: University 

of Denver. 

 
Harter, S.  (1990).  Developmental differences in the nature of self-representations: Implications 

for understanding, assessment, and treatment of maladaptive behavior.  Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 14, 113-142. 

 
 
Harter, S.  (1999).  Self-processes and developmental psychology.  In D. Ciccheti & D.J. Cohen 

(Eds.), Developmental Psychology: Vol. 1.  Theory and method (pp. 370-418). 

 
Hilsenroth, M., Stein, M., & Pinsker, J.  (2007).  Social Cognition and Object Relations Scale: 

Global Rating Method (SCORS-G; 3rd ed.).  Unpublished manuscript, The Derner 
Institute of Advanced Psychological Studies, Adelphi University, Garden City, NY. 
 

Ho, C., Bluestein, D.N., & Jenkins, J.M.  (2008).  Cultural differences in the relationship between 
 

parenting and children’s behavior.  Developmental Psychology, 44, 507-522.   

 

 
Humfress, H., O’Connor, T.G., Slaughter, J., Target, M., & Fonagy, P.  (2002).  General and 

relationship-specific models of social cognition: Explaining the overlap and 
discrepancies.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 43, 873-883.   

 
Jenkins, S.R., Goodness, K., & Burhmester, D.  (2002).  Gender differences in early 

adolescents’ relationships: Qualities, self-efficacy, and depression symptoms.  Journal of 
Early Adolescence, 22, 277-308. 
 

Kellogg, R.  (2003).  Cognitive psychology.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
 
Kelly, F.D.  (2007).  The clinical application of the Social Cognition and Object Relations Scale 

with children and adolescents.  In S.R. Smith & L. Handler (Eds.), The clinical 
assessment of children and adolescents: A practitioner’s handbook (pp. 169-184).  
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   

 
Kernberg, O.  (1976).  Object relations theory and clinical psychoanalysis.  New York: Jason
 
 
Lent, R.W., Brown, S.D., & Hackett, G.  (1994).  Toward a unifying social cognitive theory of 

Aronson. 

career and academic interest, choice, and performance.  Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 48, 474-483. 
 

Maccoby, E.  (1980).  Social development.  New York: Wiley.   
 
McDowell, D.J., & Parke, R.D.  (2009).  Parental correlates of children’s peer relations: An 

empirical test of a tripartite model.  Developmental Psychology, 45,  224-235.  

 
Mendez-Luck, C.A., Trejo, L., Miranda, J., Jimenez, E., Quiter, E.S., & Mangione, C.M.  (2011). 

Recruitment strategies and costs associated with community-based research in a 
Mexican-origin population.  The Gerontologist, 51, 94-105. 
 

Messer, B., & Harter, S.  (1986).  Manual for the Adult Self-Perception Profile.  Denver, CO: 

University of Denver. 
 

Moretti, M. M., & Higgins, E.T.  (1990).  The development of self-esteem vulnerabilities: Social  
 
and cognitive factors in developmental psychopathology.  In R.J. Sternberg & J. Kolligan 
Jr.(Eds.), Competence considered (pp. 286-314).  New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.   

 
Muris, P., Meesters, C., & Fijen, P.  (2003).  The Self-Perception Profile for Children: Further 

evidence for its factor structure, reliability, and validity.  Personality and Individual 
Differences, 35, 1791-1802. 

 
Niec, L.N., & Russ, S.W.  (2002).  Children’s internal representations, empathy, and fantasy 
play: A validity study of the SCORS-Q.  Psychological  Assessment, 14, 331-338.   

 
Nielsen, D.M., & Metha, A.  (1994).  Parental behavior and adolescent self-esteem in clinical 

and nonclinical samples.  Adolescence, 29, 525-542.   
 

Patrick, H., Hicks, L., & Ryan, A.M.  (1997).  Relations of perceived social efficacy and social 

goal pursuit to self-efficacy and academic work.  Journal of Early Adolescence, 17, 109- 

 

128.  
 

Pintrich, P.R., & Schunk, D.H.  (2002).  Motivation in education: Theory, research, and 

applications (2nd ed.).  Upper Saddle, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc. 

 
Reitman, D., Rhode, P.C., Hupp, S.D., & Altobello, C.  (2002).  Development and validation of 

the Parental Authority Questionnaire-Revised.  Journal of Psychopathology and 
Behavioral Assessment, 24, 119-127. 

 
Rodebaugh, T.L.  (2006).  Self-efficacy and social behavior. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 

44, 1831-1838. 
 

Rollins, B.C., & Thomas, D.L.  (1979).  Parental support, power, and control techniques in the 

socialization of children.  In W.R. Burr, R. Hill, F.I. Nye, & I.L. Reiss (Eds.), 
Contemporary theories about the family (Vol. 1, pp. 317-364).  New York: Free Press. 
 

Rosenberg, M.  (1979).  Conceiving the self.  New York: Basic Books.   
 
Ruble, D.N., & Frey, K.S.  (1991).  Changing patterns of comparative behavior as skills are 

acquired: A functional model of self-evaluation.  In J. Suls & T.A. Willis (Eds.)  Social 
comparison: Contemporary theory and research (pp. 70-112).  Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence  
Earlbaum Associates. 

 
Schunk, D.H.  (1995).  Self-efficacy and education and instruction.  In J.E. Maddux (Ed.), Self 

efficacy, adaptation, and adjustment: Theory, research, and applications (pp. 281-303).  
New York: Plenum. 
 

Schunk, D.H., Hanson, A.R., & Cox, P.D.  (1987).  Peer-model attributes and children’s 

achievement behaviors.  Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 201-209. 

 
Schunk, D.H., & Lilly, M.W. (1984).  Sex differences in self-efficacy and attributions: Influence 

of performance feedback.  The Journal of Early Adolescence, 4, 203-213. 

 
Schunk, D.H., & Meece, J.L.  (2006).  Self-efficacy development in adolescence.  In F. Pajares 

& T. Urdan (Eds.), Self-efficacy beliefs of adolescents (pp. 71-96).  Greenwich, CT: 
Information Age. 

 
Seligman, M.E., Kaslow, N.J., Alloy, L.B., Peterson, N., Tanenbaum, R.L, & Abramson, L.Y.  

(1984).  Attributional style and depressive symptoms among children.  Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 93, 235-238. 

 
Silver, W.S., Mitchell, T.R., & Gist, M.E. (1995).  Responses to successful and unsuccessful 

performance: The moderating effect of self-efficacy on the relationship between 
performance and attributions. Organizational Behavior, 62, 286-299. 
 

in college students.  Journal of Career Assessment, 8, 232-302.   

Smith, H., & Betz, N.E.  (2000).  Development and evaluation of a measure of social self-efficacy  
 
 
Tuber, S.  (1992).  Empirical and clinical assessments of children’s object relations and object 
 

representations.  Journal of Personality Assessment, 58, 179-197.  
 

 

Underwood, B., & Moore, B.  (1982).  Perspective-taking and altruism.  Psychological Bulletin, 

91, 143-173. 

 
Wahler, R.G., & Bellamy, A.  (1997).  Generating reciprocity with conduct problem children and 

their mothers: The effectiveness of compliance teaching and responsive parenting.  
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 14, 549-564. 
 

Westen, D.  (1991).  Social cognition and object relations.  Psychological Bulletin, 109, 429- 

455. 

 
Westen, D.  (2002).  Social Cognition and Object Relations Scale-Revised (SCORS-R). 

Unpublished manuscript, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.     

 
Whitbeck, L.  (1987).  Modeling efficacy: The effect of perceived parental efficacy on the self 

efficacy of early adolescents.  Journal of Early Adolescence, 7, 165-177. 

 
Wigfield, A., Eccles, J.S., Mac Iver, D., Reuman, D.A., & Midgley, C.  (1991).  Transitions 

during early adolescence: Changes in children’s domain-specific self-perceptions and 
general self-esteem across the transition to junior high school.  Developmental 
Psychology, 27, 552-565. 

 
Wigfield, A., Eccles, J. S., Yoon, K. S., Harold, R. D., Arbreton, A. J. A., Freedman-Doan, C., &  
Blumenfeld, P.C.  (1997).  Changes in children’s competence beliefs and subjective task 
 
values across elementary school  years: A 3-year study.  Journal of Educational, 
Psychology, 89,451-469. 

 
Zimmerman, B.J., & Cleary, T.J.  (2006).  Adolescents’ development of personal agency: The 

role of self-efficacy beliefs and self-regulatory skill.  In F. Pajares & T. Urdan (Eds.), Self 
efficacy beliefs of adolescents (pp. 45-69).  Greenwich, CT: Information Age. 

