Child Development, September/October 2003, Volume 74, Number 5, Pages 1561 – 1576

Community Violence Exposure, Social Cognition, and Aggression Among

Urban Elementary School Children

Nancy G. Guerra, L. Rowell Huesmann, and Anja Spindler

The effects of witnessing community violence on aggressive cognitions and behavior were investigated in an
ethnically diverse sample of 4,458 children living in urban neighborhoods. Prior violence exposure had a
significant effect in increasing aggression, normative beliefs about aggression, and aggressive fantasy. Although
exposure to violence predicted aggressive behavior both in Grades 1 through 3 (ages 5 – 8) and Grades 4
through 6 (ages 9 – 12), the effects on social cognition were only evident in the later grades. Furthermore, the
effect of violence exposure on aggression in the later grades was partially mediated by its effect on social
cognition. These findings suggest that witnessing community violence has an effect on children’s aggressive
behavior through both imitation of violence and the development of associated cognitions as children get older.

One of the most robust findings in the literature on
the etiology of aggression is the statistical continuity
of aggression from early childhood into adulthood
(Huesmann, Eron, Lefkowitz, & Walder, 1984;
Olweus, 1979). Several researchers have argued that
one of the mediating factors in maintaining this
continuity is the pattern of social cognition the child
develops supporting aggression. In other words,
aggressive behavior is seen as being increasingly
controlled by internal self-regulating processes that
become more stable over time (Huesmann & Guerra,
1997). Huesmann (1988, 1998) has emphasized the
importance of cognitive schemas used as models of
the world, cognitive scripts stored in memory and
used as guides for social behavior, and normative
beliefs used to evaluate the appropriateness of
scripts. The more aggressive child is presumed to
have acquired cognitive schemas depicting the
world as a more hostile place, to endorse normative
beliefs that aggression is more acceptable, and to
have encoded in memory more extensive, well-
connected networks of social scripts emphasizing
aggressive responses.

Nancy G. Guerra, Department of Psychology, University of
California, Riverside; L. Rowell Huesmann and Anja Spindler,
Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan.

Funding for this work has been provided by a grant from the
National Institute of Mental Health to the first author and by the
Centers for Disease Control to the second author. The authors
wish to thank Matheos Yosef and Steve Raudenbush for advice
and assistance in the data analyses and to thank Leonard Eron,
David Henry, Patrick Tolan, RichardVan Acker, and the large staff
of the Metropolitan Area Child Study for assistance in collecting
the data.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Nancy Guerra, Department of Psychology, University of Califor-
nia, Riverside, CA 92521. Electronic mail may be sent
to
Nancy.Guerra@ucr.edu.

These cognitions are learned over time as the
child navigates a variety of social contexts. From a
social learning perspective, an important component
of this learning process is the extent to which a child
observes the aggressive behavior of powerful role
models (Bandura, 1973; Eron, 1987). Social-cognitive
reformulations and other
theories emphasizing
social information processing further highlight the
mediating role of cognition in understanding the
link between observation of aggression and aggres-
sive behavior (Bandura, 1986; Dodge, Bates, & Pettit,
1990). Children observe what goes on around them;
make inferences and attributions; and acquire
scripts, schemas, and normative beliefs that serve
as guides for future behavior.

Of course, learned cognitions interact with emo-
tional processes to influence aggressive behavior.
Aversive stimulation in the form of provocations and
frustrations is an important situational precursor of
aggression, and contexts for growing up vary widely
in such stimulation. Huesmann (1998) has argued
that children who are repeatedly exposed to violence
during childhood habituate to it and experience it as
less aversive. This makes it easier for them to think
about and plan aggression. Additionally, individual
differences in emotional responsivity and emotion
regulation may predispose some children to be more
at risk than others. For instance, for children who are
high in emotionality, arousing events such as
violence exposure may make it more difficult for
them to develop the regulatory mechanisms neces-
sary to control their emotions (Eisenberg, Fabes,
Nyman, Bernzweig, & Pinuelas, 1994). Without such
emotional control,
their risk for aggressive and

r 2003 by the Society for Research in Child Development, Inc.
All rights reserved. 0009-3920/2003/7405-0020

1562 Guerra, Huesmann, and Spindler

antisocial behavior increases. Because of both these
cognitive and emotional processes associated with
exposure to violence, children who have had more
opportunities to observe violence across a range of
contexts should be at greater
risk to develop
aggressive habits of their own.

reported a strong relation between violence expo-
sure and externalizing symptoms 2 years later for
children in Grades 6, 8, and 10. Other studies also
have reported higher levels of violence exposure
among dangerously violent adolescents (Flannery,
Singer, & Wester, 2001).

Over

several

the last decade,

studies have
attempted to document
the extent of children’s
exposure to community violence. These studies
consistently have pointed to alarmingly high rates,
particularly in high-crime inner-city and urban
neighborhoods. For example, in a study of African
American youth in Chicago, approximately 65% of
school-age children reported having witnessed a
serious assault and 33% had witnessed a homicide
(Bell & Jenkins, 1991). In another study of youth
living in New Haven, Connecticut, 40% of
the
children surveyed reported witnessing one or more
violent crimes in the past year (Marans & Cohen,
1993). Other studies using mother’s reports of
children’s exposure have pointed to even higher
rates of witnessing at least some type of violence in
inner-city communities (Osofsky, Wewers, Hann, &
Fick, 1993; Richters & Martinez, 1993). Such findings
have resulted in comparisons of these high-violent
communities with war zones and have resulted in
repeated calls for an examination of the effects
of exposure to chronic violence and danger on
children’s development
(Garbarino, Kostelny, &
Dubrow, 1991; Lynch & Cicchetti, 1998).

Indeed, there is also a growing body of research
linking exposure to community violence with sub-
sequent disruptions in children’s well-being. Several
studies have found a relation between violence
exposure and mental health problems. For example,
in one study, more than 50% of children exposed to
violence before age 10 developed later psychiatric
problems (Martinez & Richters, 1993). Mental health
problems associated with violence exposure typi-
cally include increases in depression, anxiety, dis-
sociation, and other
trauma-related symptoms
(Singer, Anglin, Song, & Lunghofer, 1995) as well
as problems in emotion regulation (Pynoos, 1993). Of
particular relevance to the current investigation are
studies that examine the effects of community vio-
lence exposure on aggressive and antisocial behavior.
Several studies have found contemporaneous and
longitudinal relations between witnessing commu-
nity violence and aggressive and antisocial behavior
in children and adolescents. For example, Singer
et al. (1999) found that exposure to community
violence predicted violent behavior among urban
African American and White youth in Grades 3
through 8. Similarly, Schwab-Stone et al.
(1999)

the correlates,

Although these studies point

to a relation
between community violence exposure and emo-
tional and behavior problems including aggression,
four issues are worth mentioning. First, violence
exposure typically has been defined broadly, includ-
ing both observation of violence (i.e., witnessing
violence) and direct experience (i.e., violent victimi-
zation). Yet,
consequences, and
mechanisms of influence related to being a victim
of violence may differ significantly from those
related to witnessing violence. For example, in a
recent study of fourth- through sixth-grade inner-
city children, Schwartz and Proctor (2000) found
different effects for violence exposure and violent
victimization. Specifically, synchronous correlations
were found between witnessing community violence
and positive outcome and efficacy beliefs
for
aggression as well as the perception that aggression
is an appropriate response to ambiguous peer
provocation. These relations were not obtained
when examining the effect of exposure to violence
through direct victimization, which was linked
instead to problems in emotion regulation and
related social difficulties.

Second, many of the studies linking violence
exposure and aggressive and violent behavior either
have focused on violence at home or have not
distinguished it from violence in the neighborhood.
Similarly, studies looking at the effect of violence
exposure on social-cognitive processes typically
have looked at the relation between family experi-
ences such as harsh discipline on patterns of social
information processing (Weiss, Dodge, Bates, &
Pettit, 1992). Although there has been considerable
empirical support for the relation between abuse
and other forms of domestic violence on sub-
sequent aggressive, delinquent, and violent behavior
(Widom, 1989; Rivera & Widom, 1990), as well as the
effects
infor-
mation processing (Dodge et al., 1990; Spacarelli,
Coatsworth, & Bowden, 1995), caution should be
exercised in extending these findings to the effects of
community violence exposure.

on children’s

abuse

of

social

Third, studies of the prevalence and effects of
community violence exposure on children generally
have focused either on a specific age group or on a
broad range of ages and have not examined differ-
ences as a function of the child’s developmental level.

Indeed, the majority of studies of community violence
exposure and aggression have been limited to middle
school and high school youth, with studies of younger
children more commonly examining the combined
impact of living in violent communities and violent
homes (Osofsky, 1995). Yet, our theoretical model
linking aggressive behavior with aggressive scripts
and normative beliefs that are learned, in part, via
exposure to aggressive models, suggests that
the
influence of contextual factors such as living in a
violent setting should be most pronounced during the
elementary school years when these characteristic
patterns of cognition are developing.

In previous study examining the reciprocal rela-
tions between normative beliefs about aggression
and aggressive behavior during the early and late
elementary school years, Huesmann and Guerra
(1997)
found that aggressive behavior predicted
aggressive beliefs during the early elementary
school years, and aggressive beliefs predicted
behavior during the later elementary school years.
In other words, children’s cognitions about
the
legitimacy of aggression emerged from observations
of their own aggressive behavior in the early grades,
with these beliefs serving as guides for behavior
during the later elementary grades. Given that social
cognitions become more stable during the later
elementary years,
it may be that observation of
events (including one’s own social interactions as
well as other events across different contexts) relates
to the development of social-cognitive structures
during early childhood but that these social-cogni-
tive structures, once formed, are less sensitive to new
information from the environment.

Fourth, although studies have documented a
relation between violence exposure and aggression,
very little attention has focused on simultaneously
examining mechanisms that may help explain this
relation. Clearly, social-cognitive influences on ag-
gression have been studied extensively. However,
little research has examined specifically the extent to
which community violence exposure affects aggres-
sive behavior via its impact on social cognition.
Several researchers have suggested this causal chain;
for
instance, Ng-Mak, Salzinger, Feldman, and
Stueve (2002) posit a normalization of violence
theoretical model wherein normalizing cognitions
about violence serve as mediators between violence
exposure and its behavioral consequences.

In the current study, we examined the develop-
ment and continuity of community violence expo-
sure, aggressive cognitions, and aggressive behavior
as well as the concurrent and longitudinal relations
among these variables in a multiethnic sample of

Violence Exposure, Cognition, and Aggression

1563

elementary school children living in high-violence,
urban communities. In particular, we were inter-
ested in determining the role of exposure to
community violence on children’s aggressive cogni-
tions and in examining the mediating role of social
cognitions in explaining the hypothesized link
between violence exposure and aggression. We were
also interested in examining whether these relations
were different across age and gender.

We focused on two components of social cogni-
tion that have been theoretically linked to the
development of aggressive behavior and that should
be influenced by observation of violent events:
fantasizing about aggressive scripts and normative
beliefs about aggression. These cognitions normalize
violence and, hence, help children adapt to the stress
and trauma of witnessing violent events. However,
they should also make it more likely that chil-
dren will subsequently behave more aggressively
(Huesmann, 1998; Huesmann & Guerra, 1997). For
instance, children who engage in aggressive fanta-
sies that involve cognitive rehearsal of aggressive
actions will be more likely to retrieve these scripts
subsequently. Believing that aggression is more
normative will make it more likely that they will
use a retrieved aggressive script. Similarly, viewing
violence as normative may desensitize children to its
true
streetwise
mentality that has been described by some as
‘‘pathologic adaptation’’ (e.g., Schwab-Stone et al.,
1995).

resulting in a

consequences,

Based on our theoretical model and the rationale

presented previously, we addressed five issues:

1. Does exposure to community violence, aggressive
cognitions, and aggressive behavior increase or
decrease on average during the elementary school
years? In the context in which these urban
children are growing up, we expected most
children’s aggressive cognitions and aggres-
sion to increase on average. However, exposure
to community violence involves the interplay
of actual violence in the community with
opportunities to observe this violence that
may be related to practical considerations
(e.g., whether parents allow children to play
outside); therefore, its trajectory is harder to
predict.

2. Is there significant continuity in exposure to
violence, aggressive cognitions, and aggressive
behavior during the elementary school years, and
if so, is this continuity more evident during the later
elementary years? We expected to find substan-
tial continuity of aggressive behavior and

1564 Guerra, Huesmann, and Spindler

aggressive cognitions in childhood, particu-
larly in the later years as prior studies have
shown. However, whether there is a continuity
of exposure to violence in these children is
harder to predict.

3. Does

exposure

to community violence predict
subsequent aggressive behavior and subsequent
aggressive cognitions? Do these relations vary with
age? Is there any evidence that aggressive cogni-
tions or aggressive behavior also stimulate signifi-
cantly more exposure to community violence? We
expected that children who view violent
exchanges more regularly in the community
should subsequently be more likely to fanta-
size about them, view them as normative and
acceptable, and mimic them in their behaviors.
In terms of age differences, previous studies of
observation of one’s own aggressive behavior
suggest that the effects of violence exposure on
cognition should be stronger during the early
years while patterns of thought are developing
(e.g., Huesmann & Guerra, 1997). However, it
may be that observation of community vio-
lence and related cognitive shifts occur later
in childhood when children are develop-
ing adaptive coping strategies (e.g., Dempsey,
2002). Thus, it is hard to predict specific age
differences. Finally, we expected that aggres-
sive behaviors and cognitions might have a
reciprocal influence on increasing a child’s risk
for exposure to community violence. More
aggressive children who are more accepting
of violence should be more willing to place
themselves in situations where they might
observe violence.

4. Do social cognitions mediate the relation between
community violence
exposure and subsequent
aggression? Are these mediational influences strong-
er for older children than for younger children? We
predicted that exposure to community violence
would result
in cognitions that normalize
aggression, which would then prompt children
to behave more aggressively. In terms of age
differences, we expected that mediation would
be stronger for older children, given the greater
stability of cognitions during the later years
and their increased role in stimulating subse-
quent behavior.

5. Does exposure to community violence have differ-
ential effects on males and females? Studies that
have looked at relations between exposure to
community violence and aggression among
elementary school children have not found any
consistent pattern in gender differences (Attar,

Guerra, & Tolan, 1994; Schwartz & Proctor,
2000). Although boys generally are more
aggressive than girls, particularly in relation
to physical aggression, and are more likely to
view aggression as normative and acceptable,
this does not mean that the impact of witnes-
sing violence in terms of modeling or asso-
ciated cognitions will necessarily be different
between boys and girls. Thus, we did not
expect to find gender differences in any of the
hypothesized relations.

Method

The data for the analyses came from the Metropolitan
Area Child Study, a 6-year longitudinal study of
multiple cohorts of children as they moved from the
first
to sixth grades in 21 Chicago area schools
(Metropolitan Area Child Research Group, 2002).
About 75% of the children in the study received an
intervention intended to reduce their aggression at
one or two times during the 6 years. However,
independently of the intervention, data were collected
on many other measures repeatedly at 1-year intervals
during the study, yielding from one to six waves
of longitudinal data on each child. It is these data
that were used to address the major aims of this
study.

Participants

The Metropolitan Area Child Study sample,
which was used in our analyses, consists of 4,458
children who were in the first to sixth grades in 21
schools in the Chicago metropolitan area between
1991 and 1997. The sample falls into eight birth
cohorts ranging from 1981 to 1988. The sampling
unit was the school and the project selected schools
that volunteered from neighborhoods with high
levels of social distress and economic disadvantage
in the Chicago metropolitan area. For a detailed
description of school recruitment procedures, see
Guerra, Huesmann, Tolan, Van Acker, and Eron
(1995).

Once the schools were selected, parental permis-
sion was solicited in the initial year of the study for
every child in the first through fourth grades and in
subsequent years for every child entering the first
grade in the selected schools. By the end of the data
collection in 1997, parental permission for participa-
tion had been received for 4,471 children, about 85%
of the eligible children. About 40% of the sample was
African American, 40% was Hispanic, and about 20%
was non-Hispanic White. The sample consisted of

2,247 males and 2,211 females, with 13 participants
of unidentified gender being dropped,
resulting
in a total of 4,458 participants. The sample was
predominately lower socioeconomic status with more
than two thirds of
the children qualifying for
free lunch programs. The unemployment rate in
the selected Chicago neighborhoods was 29.4%
according to the 1990 census, and in the Aurora
neighborhoods it was 19.7%. The respective per capita
crime rates were 219 per 100,000 in the Chicago
neighborhoods and 113 per 100,000 in the Aurora
neighborhoods.

Attrition over 6 years of the study occurred at
both the school and individual levels. A total of 16
schools started the study. Of
these schools, 5
dropped out at some point because of changes in
administrative interest or teacher support and 5
schools were added to replace them, resulting in our
total of 21 schools. However, data collected from a
school before that school withdrew from the study
could be included in many of our growth curve
analyses as described later. Individual participant
attrition within schools also occurred because of the
high mobility of the population. Because the school
their
was the sampling unit, students who left
original
future
assessments. Additionally, during some years not
all measures could be given to all participants
because of school and teacher restrictions on time
or interviewing difficulties. Together, these factors
created a complicated pattern of available data for
each cohort, which is illustrated in Table 1. It is
difficult to summarize the attrition represented in
this table with a single number, but, as an example,
the average 3-year attrition in assessment of aggres-

schools were not

followed for

Violence Exposure, Cognition, and Aggression

1565

sion within a cohort from Grades 1 to 3 was about
27% and from Grades 4 to 6 was about 32%.

These attrition figures are not unusual for studies
in high-risk neighborhoods, but they place some
limit on the generalizations that can be drawn from
the data. A comparison of the retained participants
and those who dropped out revealed that
the
dropouts had been slightly higher on initial aggres-
siveness,
dropouts,
t(1118) 5 4.14, po.001, and SD 5 .11 higher
for
t(1378) 5 2.18, po.05. This
sixth-grade dropouts,
finding is also typical for longitudinal studies of
aggression. A possible consequence of such attrition
is that the magnitude of relations with aggression
may be underestimated because of a restriction in
range of the aggression scores at the high end.

third-grade

SD 5 .19

for

The amount of missing data created by the
attrition and the multiple cohort design presents
problems for many analyses techniques. However,
by using recent growth-curve-modeling techniques
that are robust for missing data, we can surmount
these difficulties and estimate effects over all six
waves. For subsets of grades (e.g., Grades 1 – 3 or
4 – 6), the pattern of missing data presents less of
a problem, and structural modeling can also be used.

Measures

Although a large number of child measures were
obtained during this project, only three measured
constructs are relevant
study:
children’s aggressive behavior, children’s exposure
to neighborhood violence, and children’s social
cognitions. The composition of these measures is
summarized in Table 2.

the current

for

Table 1
Design of the Longitudinal Study: Sample Sizes by Cohort and Grade for 4,458 Children in 21 Chicago Area Schools

Sample sizes for measures AG, NV, and SC in each grade

1st grade

2nd grade

3rd grade

4th grade

5th grade

6th grade

Birth cohort AG NV SC

AG NV

SC

AG NV

SC

AG NV

SC AG NV

SC

AG NV

SC

412
311
337
590
706 225

400
281
283

612

1988
1987
1986
1985
1984
1983
1982
1981
Total

101
478
668

184
211
239
457
419
2,356 225 1,576 1,247 1,976 2,530 2,696 1,850 2,039 1,757 1,115 1,507 614 1,513 1,733 1,631 1,548 1,510

380
525 105
602 509

176
220
247
545
325

177
221
246
546
543

203
232
253
497
446

191
216
240
453
448

408
499
208

407
638
712

393
275
301
523
266
218

394
270
297
528
500
541

346
224
267
462
398
478
521

278
216
240
409
407
300

323
211
223
400
382
500

1566 Guerra, Huesmann, and Spindler

Table 2
Measures

Teacher’s report aggression

(Achenbach, 1978)

Peer-nominated aggression

(Eron, Walder, & Lefkowitz, 1972)

Composite aggression

Exposure to neighborhood violence

(Attar, Guerra, & Tolan, 1994)

Aggressive fantasy

(Rosenfeld, Huesmann Eron, &
Torney-Purta, 1982)

Normative beliefs Approving

Aggression
(Huesmann & Guerra, 1997)

Sum of 25 items on the aggression scale of Achenbach’s Child Behavior Checklist

(CBC; range 5 0-50).

Proportion of times nominated by classroom peers on 10 questions of the form:
Who starts a fight over nothing?
Who tells stories and lies to get other children in trouble?
Who pushes or shoves children?
Who says mean things?
Average of standardized scores of teacher’s CBC aggression and peer-nominated

aggression

Average of four self-report items (yes 5 1; no 5 0) of the form ‘‘During the last yeary’’
1. Have you seen anyone beaten shot or really hurt by someone?
2. Have you seen or been around people shooting guns?
3. Have you been afraid to go outside and play, or have your parents make you stay

inside because of gangs or drugs in your neighborhood?

4. Have you had to hide someplace because of shootings in your neighborhood?
Average of 6 self-report items (no 5 1; a lot 5 3) of the form:
Do you sometimes have daydreams about hitting or hurting someone you don’t like?
Do you play games where you pretend to fight with someone?
Average of 20 self-report items (perfectly OK 5 4; really wrong 5 1).

12 are of the form:

Suppose a boy says something bad to another boy JohnFdo you think it’s OK for

John to hit him?
8 are of the form:
In general, it is wrong to hit other people.

Children’s aggressive behavior was assessed from
two sources: peers and teachers. Classmates’ nomi-
nations were used to assess aggression through the
Peer Nomination Inventory (Eron, Walder, & Lefko-
witz, 1972). Children were asked to nominate their
classmates who engage in 10 different physical,
verbal, and indirect aggressive behaviors. The scores
represent the ratio of times a child is nominated out
of times the child could have been nominated. The
scale’s reliability (.95 to .97) and validity have been
demonstrated in numerous studies (e.g., Guerra et al.,
1995; Huesmann et al., 1984). For classrooms in
which peer nominations could not be collected
(23.2% of all assessments), we used the Teachers
Predictions of Peer-Nominations Scale, which has
been shown to provide unbiased, highly reliable
(coefficient alpha 5 .97), and valid estimates of the
actual peer nominations (Huesmann, Guerra, Eron,
& Crawshaw, 1994). For the second assessment of
aggressive behavior for all children we used the
Teacher Report Form (TRF) of the Child Behavior
Checklist (Achenbach, 1978, 1991). The aggression
scale of the form consists of 25 behaviors that the
teacher rates on a 3-point scale. The scale and
measure are well validated and reliable. Coefficient
alpha for the TRF aggression scale is .96.

We combined these two scales to form a compo-
site aggression score by first standardizing each

standardized aggression score

measure across all scores across all years and then
taking the average of the standardized scores. Thus,
the
represents
a deviation score from the grand mean aggression
children in
score for all observations on all
all grades. This centering of
the scale allows
for more meaningful growth curve analysis with-
out changing any of
the correlations between
variables.
In the intervention analyses reported
earlier (Metropolitan Area Child Study Research
Group, 2002), we used a different composite aggres-
sion score that corrected for the two differing
distributions of component scores to form a more
reliable composite. However, that score could not be
computed if either component score was missing.
The current composite can be computed from just
one component, resulting in a higher sample size for
analysis.

Two social cognition measures were obtained
through children’s interviews. Aggressive fantasies
were assessed with the aggressive fantasies subscale
of
the Children’s Fantasy Inventory (Rosenfeld,
Huesmann, Eron, & Torney-Purta, 1982). This is a
self-report measure developed for assessing the
nature and frequency of
fantasy production in
school-aged children. It was designed to measure
cognitive rehearsal of different action sequences or
scripts (e.g., prosocial, aggressive). The aggressive

subscale in particular is intended to assess how often
children rehearse aggressive scripts, making them
more readily accessible and likely to be used in
social problem solving (Huesmann, 1988, 1998). The
aggressive fantasy scale consists of six items such as
‘‘Do you sometimes have daydreams about hitting
or hurting somebody that you don’t like?’’ Children
responded to these items on a 3-point scale (no, a
little, or a lot), and responses were averaged over the
six items. Cronbach’s alpha for this measure was .66.
Normative beliefs about aggression were measured
using the Normative Beliefs about Aggression Scale
(Huesmann & Guerra, 1997; Huesmann, Guerra,
Miller, & Zelli, 1992). This is a reliable and well-
validated self-report measure that assesses children’s
perception of how acceptable it is to behave aggres-
sively both under varying conditions of provocation
and when no conditions are specified. Children
endorse 20 items (e.g., ‘‘If you’re angry, it is OK to
say mean things to other people’’) by means of a 4-
point scale (e.g., perfectly OK, sort of OK, sort of
wrong, or really wrong). The total score is the average
of all items. Cronbach’s alpha for this scale is .87.

Children’s exposure to neighborhood violence
was measured with a subscale of the stressful events
scale developed by Attar et al. (1994). This is a four-
or five-item scale (depending on the year) assessing
the extent to which children have been exposed to
violence in the community setting. The questions ask
the children whether ‘‘during the last year’’ they
have had to hide someplace because of shootings in
the neighborhood, have had to stay inside because of
gangs or drugs in the neighborhood; have seen
people shooting guns; have seen anyone beaten,
shot, or really hurt by someone; or have had
someone they know been beaten, attacked, or really
hurt by others. Each question is scored either 0 (no)
or 1 (yes), and a child’s exposure to neighborhood
violence score is the average of these scores. The
internal consistency of the subscale is .61. Other
studies of children’s violence exposure have used
this type of brief, yes – no format and have reported
similar internal consistencies (e.g., Schwab-Stone et
al., 1995). In previous research, Attar et al. (1994)
found that children’s scores on this scale were
related to actual
levels of serious community
violence as measured by official crime data, indicat-
ing that
the scale is also a valid measure of
community violence exposure.

Procedure

Violence Exposure, Cognition, and Aggression

1567

1. The intention was to assess each child every
spring from the first through sixth grades, but the
oldest cohorts were only assessed from the fourth to
sixth grades and the youngest cohorts from the first
through third grades.

Most assessments occurred in the spring of the year
when the children were completing the designated
grade; however, a few occurred in the subsequent fall
when the children were actually just starting the next
these are clustered with the
grade. Nevertheless,
previous grade’s data. Thus,
the data-collection
periods span up to 6 months and are separated from
the next data-collection period by at least 6 months
and not more than 18 months. All assessments of the
children were done in school and were done as
individual oral self-report assessments for children in
the first grade but as classroom paper-and-pencil
assessments for children in the older grades. All
interviewers were trained graduate students, and for
the classroom assessments, at least three interviewers
were present with two roaming the classroom to help
individual children with their answers. If children
were absent on the assessment day, a make-up
individual or small-group assessment was scheduled.
For bilingual or monolingual Spanish-speaking class-
rooms, all measures were translated into Spanish
using back-translation methods. Spanish-speaking
interviewers administered the measures to these
classrooms and children. No difficulties in under-
standing the assessments were noted.

Results

Growth in Aggression, Cognitions Supporting
Aggression, and Exposure to Violence

The mean scores for each of the variables across
grades are shown in Table 3. However, these scores
can be misleading for estimating growth because of
the changing sample composition and missing data
as illustrated in Table 1. In addition, the clustering of
participants within schools introduces dependencies
that violate the usual assumption of independence of
observations. The accepted modern technique for
dealing with such data is to estimate developmental
growth across years using a hierarchical
linear
growth curve model (HLM) with time as the first
level, child as the second level, and school as the
third level (Bryk & Raudenbush, 1987; Raudenbush
& Chan, 1992; Rogosa, Brandt, & Zimowski, 1982).
These initial models included only grade as a
predictor variable with random error contributed
by school and child within school.

Each cohort of children was assessed on the three
constructs according to the schedule shown in Table

The resulting calculated growth curve for expo-
sure to neighborhood violence showed that self-

1568 Guerra, Huesmann, and Spindler

Table 3
Mean Scores by Grade

Composite aggression

Exposure to violence

Aggressive fantasy

Approving aggression

(range 5 z)

(range 5 0 – 1)

(range 5 1 – 3)

(range 5 1 – 4)

Grade

1st grade
2nd grade
3rd grade
4th grade
5th grade
6th grade

M
  .13
.03
.04
.05
.16
.10

N

2,356
1,386
2,696
1,857
703
1,631

SD

0.79
0.98
0.94
0.99
1.13
0.99

M

.43
.33
.31
.30
.27
.28

N

230
1,976
1,850
1,197
1,514
1,548

SD

.27
.26
.25
.26
.24
.24

M

1.69
1.70
1.78
1.98
1.93
1.93

N

2,104
2,533
2,077
1,509
1,736
1,509

SD

.46
.50
.50
.47
.46
.45

M

1.58
1.67
1.69
1.91
1.91
1.99

N

1,576
2,530
2,079
1,509
1,734
1,510

SD

.50
.57
.58
.56
.57
.58

reported exposure decreased significantly with
grade, B(30) 5   .02, HLM t(20) 5 6.42, po.001, effect
size 5 0.10 SD, with significant random variation also
due to school, HLM w2(2746) 5 3029, po.001, and
individual within school, HLM w2(20) 5 38.6, po.01.
To test whether the grade effect was most likely due to
an age effect or a time effect, we retested the model with
birth cohort added as a predictor for each child. The
slope of the growth curve for exposure by grade did not
differ significantly by birth cohort, suggesting that the
decrease in self-reported exposure cannot be explained
by changing neighborhood environments during the
study period. When gender was added to this growth
model, we found that females reported more exposure
t(20) 5 2.63, po.05, but also
to violence initially,
experienced more of a reduction in exposure with age
than did males, t(20) 5 2.60, po.05. As we discuss later,
this pattern of reduction in self-reported exposure may
represent both a reduction in real exposure (e.g.,
females avoiding more violent contexts) and habitua-
tion to the perceptual salience of the violence.

Although self-reported exposure to neighborhood
violence diminished as the child got older, compar-
able growth curve analyses showed that children’s
aggressive behavior and their
social cognitions
supporting aggression increased significantly with
age. In standard deviation units, aggression increased
about .04 SD per grade and the normative beliefs
supporting aggression and aggressive fantasy both
increased about .11 SD per grade. Males initially
scored much higher than females on aggression,
t(20) 5 8.61, po.001, but their rate of growth was no
different from females, t(20) 5 .37, ns. Males also
initially scored significantly higher on normative
t(20) 5 3.11, po.01,
beliefs supporting aggression,
and on aggressive fantasizing, t(20) 5 6.24, po.001,
but on these social cognitions the patterns of growth
did vary between genders. Females displayed a
significantly greater increase in aggressive fantasizing

with time, t(20) 5 2.77, po.01, although their sample
growth parameter for beliefs approving of aggression
did not differ significantly from males. Again, we
tested for cohort effects and found that the slope of
the growth curves for aggression and the two social
cognitions were not affected by cohort. However, the
intercepts for the two social cognition variables
decreased significantly for the more recent birth
cohorts: normative beliefs, t(20) 5 5.24, po.001, and
aggressive fantasy, t(20) 5 2.44, po.05. The judicious
conclusion is that although there may have been
trends during this period toward an overall reduction
in social cognitions supporting aggression by succes-
sive cohorts, the average individual in all cohorts
increased in aggression and social cognitions support-
ing aggression during the elementary school years.

Taken together, these growth curve results suggest
that aggressive cognitions and aggressive behavior
increase as a child grows older despite decreasing
scores on exposure to neighborhood violence with age.
These changes occurred in the early to mid 1990s, at the
same time as overall scores on social cognitions
supporting aggression and on exposure to neighbor-
hood violence seemed to be decreasing slightly
regardless of age.

Continuity and Intercorrelations of Measures

longitudinal

Within-variable

correlations were
computed for 1- to 4-year lags between Grades 1
and 6. As is typical, aggressive behavior showed high
continuity across these grade ranges, with 1-year
correlations averaging .63, and with a .56 correlation
for a 4-year lag. The other variables all displayed
substantial year-to-year continuity ranging from .31
to .51, but the 4-year correlations, although significant,
were not high, ranging from .14 to .17. In general, the
year-to-year correlations for the social cognitions were
higher in the later grades than in the earlier grades.

Violence Exposure, Cognition, and Aggression

1569

Table 4
Intercorrelations of Aggression, Exposure to Violence, and Social Cognitions About Aggression in Second Grade (Above Diagonal) and Sixth Grade
(Below Diagonal)

Aggressive behavior Exposure to violence Aggressive fantasy Normative beliefs approving aggression

Correlations

Aggressive behavior

Exposure to violence



.18

Aggressive fantasy

.16

(N 5 1,485)



Normative beliefs aggression

.26

(N 5 1,493)




po.05.



po.01.



po.001.

(N 5 1,495)



.18

(N 5 679)



.27

(N 5 1,466)


.18

(N 5 1,467)



.14



.16

(N 5 1,175)



.16

(N 5 1176)



.10

(N 5 1,930)



.24

(N 5 1,508)

(N 5 1,924)



.30

(N 5 2,517)

As Table 4 shows, in both the early grades (e.g.,
Grade 2 because data on exposure to violence was
limited in Grade 1) and the later grades (e.g., Grade
6), aggressive behavior, exposure to violence, nor-
mative beliefs, and aggressive fantasy all intercorre-
lated significantly though modestly. Generally, these
correlations indicate that at any point the more
aggressive child is one who is reporting more
exposure to violence, more aggressive fantasizing,
and normative beliefs that are more approving of
aggression. The correlations of the social cognitions
with exposure to violence are higher in the sixth
grade: .18 and .27 compared with .10 and .16 in the
early grades. Again,
this is consistent with our
developmental hypothesis that social cognitions
crystallize in middle childhood. At the same time,
the modest magnitude of the correlations suggests
there is substantial
individual variation on these
measures that
is not be related to exposure to
violence. One possibility could be that some of the
variance is due to the various interventions that
about 75% of the sample was exposed to during this
study. However, a comparison of these correlations
in Table 4 within the 25% control (i.e., no interven-
tion) subsample and within the rest of the sample
showed no significant differences, making it unlikely
that such interventions changed the relations much.

Lagged Effects of Exposure to Violence on Social
Cognitions and Aggression

To examine the lagged effects of exposure to
violence on aggression and social cognition as well
as any reciprocal lagged effects of aggression and
social cognitions on exposure to violence, we
conducted an expanded series of HLM growth curve
analysis with lagged effects added to the models.

Again, because of the pattern of missing observa-
tions shown in Table 1, HLM growth curve analysis
is the optimal robust technique for analyzing the
data from all cohorts and all grades simultaneously
(Raudenbush & Chan, 1992). Thus, we introduced
time-lagged effects at Level 1, introduced gender as
a child variable at Level 2, and introduced school at
Level 3 in these models to test for gender differences
in the relations. For example, the growth model
relating aggression to prior violence exposure was:
AggðtÞ ¼ P0 þ P1GradeðtÞ þ P2Aggðt   1Þ

þ P3ViolExposðt   1Þ þ error

Pi ¼ Bi0 þ Bi1Gender þ error between children
Bij ¼ Gij0 þ error between schools:
The reciprocal model relating violence exposure to
prior aggression was:
ViolExposðtÞ ¼ P0 þ P1GradeðtÞ

þ P2 ViolExposðt   1Þ þ P3Aggðt   1Þ
þ error

Pi ¼ Bi0 þ Bi1  Gender þ error between children
Bij ¼ Gij0 þ error between schools:
The models relating violence exposure to normative
beliefs and aggressive fantasy to violence exposure
were parallel to this one. The resulting calculated
growth curves for the three cases are shown in
Figures 1 through 3. The estimated slope parameters
of
these growth curves in Figures 1 through 3
represent the best estimates of the average effects
over all 5 years of the predictor variables in 1 year on
the criterion variables in the next year, that is, effect
for a 1-year lag.

As with the general growth curves, on most of these
lagged curves the intercepts varied with gender but the
slopes did not. Males score higher on the intercept of

1570 Guerra, Huesmann, and Spindler

Figure 1. The average one-year lagged relation between exposure
to neighborhood violence and aggressive behavior for Grades 1 to
6 computed from a three-level (time within person within school)
hierarchical linear growth model. Comp Agg 5 composite aggres-
sion; Exp Viol 5 exposure to violence; Weigh Viol 5 neighborhood
violence.

Figure 2. The average one-year lagged relation between exposure
to neighborhood violence and normative beliefs approving of
aggression for Grades 1 to 6 computed from a three-level (time
within person within school) hierarchical linear growth model.
Norm Beliefs 5 normative beliefs; Expos Viol 5 exposure to
violence.

aggressive

fantasy to subsequent

the lagged growth curve relating violence exposure
and prior normative beliefs to subsequent normative
beliefs, B01 5 .31, t(2776) 5 3.16, po.01, and on the
intercept relating violence exposure and prior aggres-
sive
fantasy,
B01 5 .41, t(2777) 5 3.80, po.001. Males did not score
significantly higher on the intercept of the curve
relating violence exposure and prior aggression to
subsequent aggressive behavior, B01 5 .20, t(1415) 5
1.54, ns. These intercept effects simply indicate that
males have initially higher scores on the social
cognitions supporting aggression and continue to
maintain those differences as they grow up. The fact
that the intercept effect for gender on aggression was
not significant is probably a function of the very high
continuity of aggression over time within both genders.
It means that gender does not add to the prediction of a
participant’s aggression in a particular grade if his or
her aggression in the prior grade is known. Gender
had a significant effect on slope of growth only for
violence
fantasy,
t(3655) 5 2.12, po.05. The effect of prior exposure to
violence on fantasizing about aggression was greater

exposure predicting aggressive

Figure 3. The average one-year lagged relation between exposure
to neighborhood violence and aggressive fantasy for Grades 1 to 6
computed separately for males and females from a three-level
(time within person within school) hierarchical linear growth
model. Agg Fant 5 aggressive fantasy; Expos Viol 5 exposure to
violence.

for males. Thus, we present the results for males and
females separately only for aggressive fantasy.

aggression,

subsequent

Figures 1 through 3 reveal that across Grades 1 to
6 exposure to violence has a significant effect in
B30 5 .10,
increasing
t(1503) 5 4.89, po.001; subsequent beliefs support-
ing aggression, B30 5 .07, t(18) 5 4.05, po.001; and
aggressive fantasy, B30 5 .14, po.001 for males,
B30 5 .08, po.001 for females. There is no effect of
being aggressive on subsequent exposure to neigh-
borhood violence or of approving of aggression on
subsequent exposure to neighborhood violence. For
males only, there is a significant effect of aggressive
fantasizing on subsequent exposure to violence,
B30 5 .07, po.01, but the magnitude of the effect is
only half as great as the stimulating effect of
exposure to violence on aggressive fantasizing.
Overall, these results show that childhood exposure
to violence predicts subsequent social cognitions
about aggression and aggressive behavior for both
males and females across Grades 1 to 6.

In Figures 4 through 6, the lagged coefficients for
these same calculated growth models are displayed
separately for Grades 1 to 3 and Grades 4 to 6. Males
and females are analyzed together for aggressive
fantasy as they showed the same effects for exposure
to violence on fantasy. As we had hypothesized,
exposure to violence predicts subsequent aggressive
behavior both in the early grades, B30 5 .08,
t(333) 5 2.22, po.05, and in the later grades,
B30 5 .09, t(374) 5 2.18, po.05. However, the effects
of exposure to violence on the social cognitions are
only significant in the later grades: normative beliefs,
B30 5 .13, t(407) 5 3.09, po.01, and aggressive fan-

Violence Exposure, Cognition, and Aggression

1571

tasy, B30 5 .16, t(412) 5 3.49, po.01. Although the
reciprocal models predicting exposure to violence
could not be computed for the early grades because
of the amount of missing data (see Table 1), they
were computed for the older grades and showed no
significant effects of aggression, normative beliefs
supporting aggression, or aggressive fantasy on
subsequent exposure to violence in this grade range.
The conclusion these data suggest is that exposure to
violence in the neighborhood is stimulating aggres-
sion in all grades and social cognitions supporting
aggression in later middle childhood.

Do Social Cognitions Mediate the Effects of Exposure to
Violence on Aggression?

the causal ordering of

Mediation can best be tested with structural
models relating three waves of data (Kline, 1998);
therefore,
the measured
variables is unambiguous. For Grades 4 to 6 where
prior exposure to violence was related to subsequent
aggression and social cognitions, there were suffi-
cient complete data to construct such models. In the
early grades there were not sufficient data, but as
shown earlier, exposure to violence did not predict
subsequent aggressive fantasizing or normative
beliefs in those grades. To maximize the sample
size, we used the mean exposure to violence that the
participants reported in the 24 months before their
assessment on the social cognitions as the measure
of exposure to violence. We used the composite
teacher and peer-nominated measure of aggression
taken 12 months after the assessment of the social
cognitions as the criterion.

In left panel of Figure 7, the structural model is
presented that tests the extent to which the effects of
exposure to neighborhood violence on aggression
are mediated by normative beliefs approving of
aggression and by fantasizing about aggression. The
parameters of this model were estimated using the
entire sample, and they revealed that about 22% of
the effect of exposure to violence on aggression was
mediated by the two social cognitions. In particular,
the mediating effect of normative beliefs, 16%,
z 5 4.96, po.001, was highly significant. The mediat-
ing effect of aggressive fantasy,
in contrast, was
marginal, 6%, z 5 1.84, po.10. In the right panel of
Figure 7, the parameters for the structural model
were recomputed for the control group subsample
alone as a cross-validation. This cross-validation is
important because the interventions to which the
participants were exposed might have produced the
mediation effect. However, the mediation effect was
no smaller for the control group; in fact, it was

Figure 4. The average one-year lagged relations between exposure
to neighborhood violence and aggressive behavior estimated
separately for early and late elementary grades from a three-level
hierarchical linear growth model. Comp Agg 5 composite aggres-
sion; Expos Viol 5 exposure to violence.

Figure 5. The average one-year lagged relations between exposure
to neighborhood violence and normative beliefs approving of
aggression estimated separately for early and late elementary
grades from a three-level hierarchical linear growth model. Norm
Beliefs 5 normative beliefs; Expos Viol 5 exposure to violence.

Figure 6. The average one-year lagged relations between exposure
to neighborhood violence and aggressive fantasy estimated
separately for early and late elementary grades from a three-level
hierarchical linear growth model. Agg Fant 5 aggressive fantasy;
Expos Viol 5 exposure to violence.

1572 Guerra, Huesmann, and Spindler

Figure 7. Two structural models showing the role of aggressive
fantasy and normative beliefs in mediating the influence of
exposure to community violence on aggressive behavior in Grades
4 to 6. The model in the left panel fits the data from the entire
sample. For this model the total effect of exposure to violence on
aggression 5 .234; the mediated effect through aggressive fan-
tasy 5.013 5 6%, po.10; the mediated effect through normative
beliefs 5 .037 5 16%, po.001; and the leftover direct effect of
exposure to violence 5 .184 5 78%, po.001. The model in the right
panel fits the data from the control group subsample. For this
model the total effect of exposure to violence on aggression 5 1.70;
through aggressive fantasy 5.012 5 7%,
the mediated effect
po.10;
through normative beliefs 5
.043 5 25%, po.001; and the leftover direct effect of exposure to
violence 5 .115 5 68%, po.001. Agg Fant 5 aggressive fantasy;
Comp Agg 5 composite aggression; Norm Beliefs 5 normative
beliefs; Expos Viol 5 exposure to violence.

the mediated effect

slightly larger, with about 32% of
the effect of
exposure to violence on aggression being mediated
by social cognitions. The fact that mediation is no
less in the control group subsample suggests that
mediation is not a consequence of the interventions
many participants experienced. Again, normative
beliefs was the social cognition that accounted for
most of the mediating effect, 25%, z 5 2.53, po.01.
Although these models suggest that the majority
of the effect of exposure to neighborhood violence on
aggression is due to processes not related to the two
cognitions measured in this study,
the models
confirm that normative beliefs play an important
mediating role connecting exposure to contextual
violence to subsequent aggressive behavior in older
elementary school children.

Discussion

In the present study we examined the effects of
community violence exposure on the aggressive
cognitions and behavior of elementary-school-age
children living in urban and inner-city communities.
The first question we addressed was whether
exposure to community violence, aggressive cogni-
tions, and aggressive behavior increase or decrease

on average during the elementary school years. We
found that children reported a decrease in exposure
to community violence over time that was not
explained by changing neighborhood environments.
Several explanations seem plausible. First, given the
generally high rates of community violence in the
neighborhoods where children in our study live,
repeated exposure may result in habituation to the
point that children are less likely to notice and pay
attention to incidents of violence. Along these lines,
some of this decline might reflect measurement
error, with younger children more likely to exagger-
ate their experiences than older children. It may also
be that as children get older they are also less likely
to play outside; therefore, they are simply less likely
to be in settings where neighborhood violence
occurs. It is plausible that this would be particularly
true for females who indeed showed a greater
decline in exposure.

In contrast to our findings for violence exposure,
aggressive cognitions and aggressive behavior were
found to increase during the elementary school
years. This is consistent with studies showing
increases in aggression with age during childhood
and adolescence (Elliott, 1994; Loeber & Stouthamer-
Loeber, 1998). Although Tremblay (2000) pointed out
that different
types of aggression may follow
different developmental courses in different settings,
our study showed that during the early elementary
school years in urban and inner-city settings,
children are developing patterns of behavior that
are increasingly likely to involve aggressive inter-
changes. These patterns of behavior are also accom-
panied by changes
related to
aggressive scripts that provide opportunities to
rehearse cognitively aggressive sequences and dem-
onstrate greater support for its legitimacy. Otherwise
put, as children get older they are acting more
aggressively and are developing cognitions that
support such behavior.

in cognitions

internal

self-regulating processes

Our theoretical model emphasized the impor-
tance of
that
become more stable over time. Thus, we expected
that characteristic patterns of thought and action
would be more pronounced as children got older.
This was the case with aggressive behavior. Con-
sistent with previous research, aggressive behavior
showed high continuity across all grades and across
multiple years. Aggressive fantasy and normative
beliefs about aggression also showed reasonably
high year-to-year continuity that increased with age.
However, cognitions seemed to be much less stable
than aggressive behavior over multiple years. This
points to the importance of focusing preventive

interventions during the elementary school years on
influencing children’s emerging cognitive structures.
Our data also provide additional support for the
well-documented relation between social cognition
and aggression. More aggressive children report
more exposure to violence, aggressive fantasizing,
and normative beliefs supporting aggression. In the
present study, we were particularly interested in the
effects of exposure to community violence on the
development of
these cognitive and behavioral
patterns. Although previous studies have demon-
strated a link between harsh or violent
family
environments and aggressive social cognition (e.g.,
Weiss et al., 1992), few studies have examined the
effect of community violence exposure on these
cognitive factors and whether these effects vary by
age.

Perhaps the most important finding from this
study is that exposure to community violence
increases children’s subsequent aggressive behavior
and social cognition supporting aggression. Violence
exposure seemed to stimulate subsequent aggressive
behavior for children in both the early and late
elementary grades. However, violence exposure only
stimulated increases in aggressive social cognition
during the later elementary school grades.
In
previous research with urban and inner-city youth,
we found that a child’s own aggressive behavior
predicted aggressive cognitions during the early
elementary school years, with cognitions predicting
behavior during the later elementary school years.
We interpreted these findings as showing that
children’s cognitions emerged from their observa-
tions of their own behavior early on, with cognitions
then guiding behavior as patterns of thought become
more stable during the later elementary school years.
Based on these findings, we had expected that
observation of community violence would predict
increases in aggressive cognitions during the early
elementary years as well. This does not seem to have
been the case.
the effects of
community violence exposure on cognition are
related to a habituation process that requires more
time than behavioral changes require. As social
cognitions are unstable during the early elementary
years, the effects of exposure on cognition are thus
less noticeable.

It may be that

the reverse was generally not

Although exposure to violence predicted subse-
quent aggression and social cognition supporting
aggression,
true:
Exposure was not predicted by prior aggression or
social cognition. One exception was a small but
significant effect for males of aggressive fantasizing
on subsequent exposure to violence. This could

Violence Exposure, Cognition, and Aggression

1573

indicate that males who fantasize more about
aggressive interactions seek out opportunities to
observe them or at least do not avoid them to the
extent that less aggressive males avoid them. This
process might begin during childhood as children
observe violence, behave aggressively, come to see it
as a legitimate behavior, prepare for future aggres-
sion via cognitive fantasy rehearsal, and seek out
opportunities to view and observe evidence of their
emerging world view that
involves aggressive
interchanges. Furthermore, because they have fanta-
sized about it so much, they may be less afraid of
exposing themselves to violent situations. By ado-
lescence, children who are thus primed for aggres-
sion may gravitate toward other contexts such as
gangs that provide ready access to observation of
and participation in violence.

Given the observed relations among exposure to
community violence, social cognition, and aggres-
sion during the later elementary years, we also
examined whether the effects of violence exposure
were mediated by social cognition. We found that
normative beliefs did play a significant mediating
role. As discussed by other
(e.g.,
Schwab-Stone et al., 1995), viewing violence as
normative may desensitize children to its true
consequences and create a context whereby it is
accepted as a way of life, resulting in an increased
readiness to behave aggressively. Still, much of the
effect of exposure to violence was not mediated in
this way. That result is not surprising, as numerous
other potential mediators that were unmeasured
could play a role.

researchers

Consistent with the literature on gender differ-
ences in physical aggression, males scored higher
than females on measures of aggression, fantasizing
about aggression, and normative beliefs approving of
aggression. Although the growth in aggression and
normative beliefs approving of aggression during the
elementary school years did not differ between boys
and girls, girls did display more of an increase than
boys in aggressive fantasy. This may reflect differ-
ential socialization by gender
the
appropriateness of aggression;
for girls,
aggression may be relegated to the domain of fantasy
and other private thought processes. Differential
socialization may also explain why girls showed
more exposure to community violence initially and
more of a decrease in exposure to community
violence over time. Females may be socialized to
notice violence more, but may also be socialized to
avoid violent contexts more as they grow up.

in terms of
that

is,

For the major relations of interest in this study,
however, gender played no significant moderating

1574 Guerra, Huesmann, and Spindler

role. The correlations between exposure to commu-
nity violence, aggressive behavior, and aggressive
cognitions did not vary consistently by gender. The
effects of exposure to violence on subsequent
aggression and aggressive cognitions were not
significantly different for boys and girls, although
relations between violence exposure and aggressive
fantasy were stronger for boys than girls. It may be
that both boys and girls retreat
to aggressive
fantasies as a mechanism for coping with high levels
of witnessing violence, but boys may take this a step
further because they have a greater expectation that
they will be involved in or around violence. Finally,
normative beliefs mediated the relation between
exposure to violence and aggressive behavior in the
later elementary grades for both boys and girls.

Our study was limited to the effects of witnessing
neighborhood violence on children’s aggressive behav-
ior and cognition. However, even in the high-violence
communities where children in this study lived, this
type of violence (e.g., shootings, beatings)
is still
relatively rare. Furthermore, our assessment was
limited to a few self-report items that referred to this
extreme type of violence. Although the level of violence
exposure reported by children seemed to concur with
official crime data, this is still a relatively weak measure
that taps exposure only to extreme events.

It is also important to examine the extent to which
other types of violence exposure that are likely to be
more regularly experienced are also influencing
children’s development and how the effect of
witnessing violence varies as a function of type and
level of exposure. This includes family violence,
violence in the peer group, and violence in the
classroom and school. It may be that the effects of
violence exposure are additive, so that witnessing
more violence across contexts has a cumulative effect
on behavior and cognition. Alternately, the effects of
violence exposure may be multiplicative, so that the
compound effects are particularly detrimental.

Future longitudinal research should focus on the
influence of multiple types of violence exposure on
children’s behavior and the potential mediating
mechanisms. One suggested line of research is to
expand the potential social cognitive mediators
studied to include a broader range of factors. For
instance,
it may be that violence exposure also
influences outcome expectancies, with increased
exposure to the real consequences of violence (e.g.,
pain,
leading to more negative outcome
expectancies. On the other hand, repeated violence
exposure might lead children to adopt revenge goals
to ward off potential threats. These relations may
also be moderated by age and gender, as we found

injury)

in the current study. Other suggested moderators
might include children’s level of emotionality and
level of aggression. For instance, violence exposure
might have the greatest effect for children who are
marginally aggressive and may be more susceptible
to social influence (Dodge, Nicholson, & Stearns,
2003).

Beyond a focus on social cognitive mediators of
violence exposure, it is important to examine and
compare the effects of both exposure and victimiza-
tion. It seems that both experiences negatively affect
children; however, it is important to differentiate
further the unique contributions of exposure versus
victimization, as well as the joint influence of being
both victimized and exposed to violence. Just as it is
important to examine the influence of exposure to
different types of violence, it is also important to
compare the influence of different types of violent
victimization (e.g., by peers, by family members, by
strangers).

It goes with out saying that the first line of
prevention is to reduce the levels of violence in the
community and elsewhere to minimize children’s
exposure to violence and to increase their safety.
However, to the extent that children continue to
observe violence, it is also critical to recognize that it
does have a significant and harmful impact on their
development and contributes to the learning of
aggression. How can we minimize the impact of
violence exposure on behavior and cognition? As
mentioned previously,
the results of our own
intervention study in urban communities and of
other similar studies suggest that efforts to modify
and redirect children’s cognitions can be successful
if begun early. These efforts should be designed to
lessen habituation to violence, so that children
continue to see it as harmful and non-normative.
These efforts should also focus on teaching children
nonaggressive scripts that are sensitive to the
difficult and often violent environments that they
must navigate, as well as engaging parents and
others in protecting children from the potentially
harmful effects of violence exposure.

References

Achenbach, T. M. (1978). The child behavior profile: I. Boys
aged 6 – 11. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
46, 478 – 488.

Achenbach, T. M. (1991). Integrative guide for the 1991 CBCL/
4 – 18, YSR, and TRF profiles. Burlington: University of
Vermont, Department of Psychiatry.

Attar, B. K., Guerra, N. G., & Tolan, P. H.

(1994).
Neighborhood disadvantage, stressful life events, and

adjustment in urban elementary-school children. Journal
of Clinical Child Psychology, 23, 391 – 400.

Bandura, A. (1973). Aggression: A social learning analysis.

New York: Holt.

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action:
A social-cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.

Bell, C. C., & Jenkins, E. J. (1991). Traumatic stress and
children. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Under-
served, 2, 175 – 185.

Bryk, A. S., & Raudenbush, S. W. (1987). Application of
hierarchical linear models to assessing change. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 101, 147 – 158.

Dempsey, M. (2002). Negative coping as mediator in the
relation between violence and outcomes: Inner city
African American youth. American Journal of Orthopsy-
chiatry, 72, 102 – 109.
Dodge, K. A., Bates,

(1990).
Mechanisms in the cycle of violence. Science, 250,
1678 – 1683.

J. E., & Pettit, G. A.

Dodge, K. A., Nicholson, M. J., & Stearns, M. E. (2003).
From mischief to violence: How culture shapes the growth of
aggressive behavior. Paper presented at
the biannual
meeting of the Society for Research in Child Develop-
ment, Tampa, FL.

Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Nyman, M., Bernzweig, J., &
Pinuelas, A. (1994). The relations of emotionality and
regulation to children’s anger-related reactions. Child
Development, 65, 109 – 128.

Elliott, D. S.

(1994). Serious violent offenders: Onset,
developmental course and termination: The American
Society of Criminology 1993 Presidential Address.
Criminology, 32, 1 – 21.

Eron, L. D. (1987). The development of aggressive behavior
from the perspective of a developing behaviorism.
American Psychologist, 42, 435 – 442.

Eron, L. D., Walder, L. O., & Lefkowitz, M. M. (1972). The

learning of aggression in children. Boston: Little, Brown.

Flannery, D. J., Singer, M. I., & Wester, K. (2001). Violence
exposure, psychological trauma, and suicide risk in a
community sample of dangerously violent adolescents.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 40, 1 – 8.

Garbarino, J., Kostelny, K., & Dubrow, N. (1991). What
children can tell us about living in danger. American
Psychologist, 46, 376 – 382.

Guerra, N. G., Huesmann, L. R., Tolan, P. H., Van Acker, R.,
& Eron, L. D. (1995). Stressful events and individual
beliefs as correlates of economic disadvantage and
aggression among urban children. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 63, 518 – 528.

Huesmann, L. R. (1988). An information processing model
for the development of aggression. Aggressive Behavior,
14, 13 – 24.

Huesmann, L. R. (1998). The role of social information
processing and cognitive schema in the acquisition and
maintenance of habitual aggressive behavior. In R. E.
Geen & E. Donnerstein (Eds.), Human aggression:

Violence Exposure, Cognition, and Aggression

1575

Theories, research, and implications for policy (pp. 73 –
109). New York: Academic Press.

Huesmann, L. R., Eron, L. D., Lefkowitz, M. M., & Walder,
L. O. (1984). Stability of aggression over time and
generations. Developmental Psychology, 20, 1120 – 1134.

Huesmann, L. R., & Guerra, N. G. (1997). Children’s
normative beliefs about aggression and aggressive
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72,
408 – 419.

Huesmann, L. R., Guerra, N. G., Eron, L. D., & Crawshaw,
V. B.
(1994). Measuring children’s aggression with
teachers’ predictions of peer nominations. Psychological
Assessment, 6, 329 – 336.

Huesmann, L. R., Guerra, N. G., Miller, L., & Zelli, A.
(1992). The role of social norms in the development of
aggression.
In H. Zumckly & A. Fraczek (Eds.),
Socialization and aggression (pp. 139 – 151). New York:
Springer-Verlag.

Kline, R. (1998). Structural modeling. New York: Guilford.
Loeber, R., & Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (1998). Development
of juvenile aggression and violence. Some common
misconceptions and controversies. American Psycholo-
gist, 53, 242 – 259.

Lynch, M., & Cicchetti, D. (1998). An ecological-transac-
tional analysis of children and contexts: The long-
itudinal
child maltreatment,
community violence, and children’s symptomatology.
Development and Psychopathology, 10, 235 – 257.

interplay

among

Marans, S., & Cohen, D. (1993). Children and inner-city
violence: Strategies for intervention. In L. Leavitt & N.
Fox (Eds.), Psychological effects of war and violence on
children (pp. 281 – 302). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Martinez, P., & Richters, J. E. (1993). The NIMH Commu-
nity Violence Project: II. Children’s distress symptoms
associated with violence exposure. Psychiatry: Interper-
sonal and Biological Processes, 56, 22 – 35.

Metropolitan Area Child Research Group.

(2002). A
cognitive-ecological approach to preventing aggression
in urban settings:
for high-risk
children. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
70, 179 – 194.

Initial outcomes

Ng-Mak, D. S., Salzinger, S., Feldman, R., & Stueve, A.
(2002). Normalization of violence among inner-city
youth: A formulation for research. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 72, 92 – 101.

Olweus, D. (1979). Stability of aggressive reaction patters

in males: A review. Psychological Bulletin, 85, 852 – 875.

Osofsky, J. D. (1995). The effects of exposure to violence on

young children. American Psychologist, 50, 782 – 788.

Osofsky, J. D., Wewers, S., Hann, D. M., & Fick, A. C.
(1993). Chronic community violence: What is happening
to our children? Psychiatry, 56, 36 – 45.

Pynoos, R. S. (1993). Traumatic stress and developmental
psychopathology in children and adolescents. In J. M.
Oldham, M. B. Riba, & A. Tasman (Eds.), American
Psychiatric Press review of psychiatry, Vol. 12. (pp. 205 –
238). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

1576 Guerra, Huesmann, and Spindler

Raudenbush, S. W., & Chan W-S.

(1992). Growth curve
analysis in accelerated longitudinal designs. Journal of
Research in Crime and Delinquency, 29, 387 – 411.

Richters, J. E., & Martinez, P. (1993). The NIMH commu-
nity violence project: Vol. 1. Children as victims of and
witnesses to violence. Psychiatry, 56, 7 – 21.

Rivera, B., & Widom, C. S. (1990). Childhood victimization

and violent offending. Violence and Victims, 5, 19 – 35.

Rogosa, D., Brandt, D., & Zimowski, M. (1982). A growth
curve approach to the measurement of change. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 92, 726 – 748.

Rosenfeld, E., Huesmann, L. R., Eron, L. D., & Torney-
Purta,
fantasy
behavior in children. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 42, 347 – 366.

(1982). Measuring patterns of

J. V.

Schwab-Stone, M., Ayers, M. E., Kasprow, W., Voyce, C.,
Barone, C., & Shriver, T., et al. (1995). No safe haven: A
study of violence exposure in urban communities.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 34, 1343 – 1352.

Schwab-Stone, M., Chen, C., Greenberger, E., Silver, D.,
Lichtman, J., & Voyce, C. (1999). No safe haven II: The
effects of violence exposure on urban youth. Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
38, 359 – 367.

Schwartz, D., & Proctor, L. J. (2000). Community violence
exposure and children’s social adjustment in the school

peer group: The mediating roles of emotional regulation
and social cognition. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 68, 670 – 683.

Singer, M. I., Anglin, T. M., Song, . L. Y., & Longhofer, L.
(1995). Adolescents’ exposure to violence and associated
273,
symptoms of psychological
477 – 482.

trauma.

JAMA,

Singer, M. I., Miller, D. B., Guo, S., Flannery, D. J., Frierson,
T., & Slovak, K. (1999). Contributors to violent behavior
among elementary and middle school children. Pedia-
trics, 104, 878 – 884.

Spacarelli, S., Coatsworth, J. D., & Bowden, B. S. (1995).
Exposure to serious family violence among incarcerated
boys: Its association with violent offending and poten-
tial mediating variables. Violence and Victims, 10,
163 – 182.

Tremblay, R.

(2000). The development of aggressive
behaviour during childhood: What have we learned in
the past century? International Journal of Behavior Devel-
opment, 24, 129 – 141.

Weiss, B., Dodge, K. A., Bates, J. E., & Pettit, G. A. (1992).
Some consequences of early harsh discipline: Child
aggression and a maladaptive social-information-pro-
cessing style. Child Development, 63, 1321 – 1335.

Widom, K. (1989). Does violence beget violence? Psycho-

logical Bulletin, 106, 3 – 28.

