PsyCh Journal 6 (2017): 57–75
DOI: 10.1002/pchj.160

Cognitive self-regulation and social functioning among French
children: A longitudinal study from kindergarten to ﬁrst grade

Blandine Hubert, Philippe Guimard, and Agnès Florin

Faculty of Psychology, University of Nantes, Nantes Cedex 3, France

Abstract: This study adds to the body of research examining the links between two components of cognitive self-regulation (inhibitory
control and verbal working memory) and social functioning (social integration, social problem solving, and prosocial skills) and focuses
on children’s sex as a moderator of the association between cognitive self-regulation and social functioning. The participants (N = 131)
were French schoolchildren followed from kindergarten (Mage = 68.36 months, SD = 3.33 months) through Grade 1. Using hierarchical
regression analyses, three major ﬁndings were revealed: (1) inhibitory control was a better predictor than verbal working memory of pro-
social skills assessed by peers using the sociometric technique as well as by teachers using questionnaires, after controlling for sex,
mother’s education, and verbal and non-verbal IQ; (2) the prosocial skills assessed by teachers in kindergarten contributed more to
explaining the prosocial skills and peer acceptance assessed in Grade 1 than cognitive self-regulation; and (3) sex did not moderate the
relationship between cognitive self-regulation and social functioning. These results suggest that developing strong cognitive self-regula-
tion, especially inhibitory control and prosocial skills,
in young children schooled in France could be beneﬁcial for their social
development.

Keywords: cognitive self-regulation; prosocial skills; peer integration; social problem solving
Correspondence: Dr. Blandine Hubert, Faculté de Psychology, University of Nantes, Chemin de la Censive et du Tertre, BP 81227,
44312 Nantes Cedex 3, France. Email: blandine.hubert44@gmail.com

Received 30 September 2016. Accepted 5 January 2017.

Social development includes behavioral problems (externa-
lized and internalized behaviors), prosocial behavior, and
peer
relationships (Sanson, Hemphill, & Smart, 2004).
When children begin school, social development is particu-
larly salient. At school, the child evolves within a group of
peers and learns to live in a community. Because people
need to belong to a group (Baumeister & Leary, 1995), the
majority of children want
to belong to this community
(i.e., to be accepted by their peers). However, peer relation-
ships
hierarchical
(Gallagher & Sylvester, 2009). In fact, all children are not
equally accepted by their peers. A large number of factors
are associated with peer acceptance, including emotional
and cognitive self-regulation. Children with poor self-
regulation skills are less accepted by their peers than those
with better self-regulation skills. This is a major concern
because the children less appreciated by their peers are
more often found in situations of social withdrawal,

competitive,

and

are

complex,

rejected and victimized by their peers
(Arseneault,
Bowes, & Shakoor, 2010; Asher, Paquette MacEvoy, &
McDonald, 2008; Ladd & Proﬁlet, 1996; Ostrov, 2010). In
contrast,
the most popular children are less anxious at
school, more engaged in the classroom, and manage transi-
tions successfully, such as the one from kindergarten to
Grade 1 (Brendgen, Vitaro, Bukowski, Doyle, & Markie-
wicz, 2001). The meta-analysis of Jiang and Cillessen
(2005) revealed that the acceptance or rejection of children
is quite stable. The stable nature of social integration is
especially worrying for rejected children and could be due
to the acquisition of a social reputation (e.g., an aggressive
child, or an uncooperative child), with the child integrating
their status and adopting a behavioral pattern corresponding
to this reputation.

This longitudinal study aimed to investigate the relation-
ships between two components of cognitive self-regulation
(inhibitory control and verbal working memory), social

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

58

Self-regulation and social functioning

integration (acceptance and rejection), social problem sol-
ving, and prosocial skills from kindergarten to ﬁrst grade
and to explore whether patterns of association between
these dimensions differ for boys and girls.

Associations between social problem solving,

prosocial skills, and social integration

regularly

referred

to

as

of

social

limit social

different

aspects

“prosocial

The concept of social validity is commonly accepted as dis-
tinguishing
development
(McClelland & Scalzo, 2006; Yeates et al., 2007). This is a
heuristic model in which the speciﬁc behaviors manifested
by children act on their interactions and in a long-term per-
spective on their social integration. The behaviors judged
positive by the environment enhance social
integration
while negative behaviors tend to slow it down. Behaviors
judged positive to initiate and maintain positive interactions
skills”
are
(e.g. cooperation, help, and sharing). In contrast, aggressive
behavior and social withdrawal
integration
(Elliott & Gresham, 1987; Gresham, 2001). Rubin,
Bukowski, and Parker (2006) and Yeates et al. (2007) com-
plexiﬁed this conceptualization by adding an extra level,
“social
information processing.” Their framework distin-
guishes three levels:
information processing;
(2) social interactions; and (3) social adjustment. The ﬁrst
level mobilizes cognitive and emotional self-regulation, rel-
evant knowledge of the theory of mind, and the ability to
resolve social problems (i.e., the ability to perceive con-
ﬂicts and generate prosocial actions to solve them; Crick &
Dodge, 1994). Self-regulation, theory of mind, and social
problem solving are interrelated. The process of social
problem solving depends primarily on cognitive, affective,
and language skills. When children have to solve a social
problem, they must engage in an encoding process, during
which various types of information will be placed into
working memory. Then, once the children have analyzed
the problem,
irrelevant behavioral
responses in order to activate those adapted to acting in a
socially acceptable way (Crick & Dodge, 1994; Lemerise &
Arsenio, 2000).

they have to inhibit

(1) social

The second level (social interactions) is determined by
the actions (prosocial or antisocial behaviors) exhibited by
the children. This reﬂects the degree to which children
adapt to their behaviors according to the social context.
Finally, the third level (social adjustment) represents the

quality of the relationships with others and is similar to the
idea of social integration. Indeed, Yeates et al. (2007) indi-
cated that social adjustment can be assessed via classroom
peer acceptance nominations. Each level is inﬂuenced by
the intrinsic characteristics of the children (e.g., their sex,
age, and IQ) and by the social environment in which they
grow up (e.g., their mother’s education). In this study, the
three levels were integrated. Thus, we examined whether
two components of cognitive self-regulation (ﬁrst
level)
contributed to explaining prosocial skills (second level) and
peer acceptance and rejection (third level) after controlling
for social problem solving (ﬁrst level).

Peer acceptance is deﬁned as an index of appreciation of
the relationships between peers and an indicator of their
social integration (Asher et al., 2008). Although observa-
tion and questionnaires are considered relevant methods for
the study of social skills (Merrell, 2001), especially for
peer relationships (Pepler & Craig, 1998), sociometric tech-
niques are often used to establish the degree of acceptance
and rejection by peers. This method consists of interview-
ing peers about their afﬁliations with peers on the basis of
an emotional judgment. Generally, researchers ask the chil-
dren to report the classmates they most like to play with at
recreation time (i.e., positive nominations) and those they
least like to play with (i.e., negative nominations; Coie,
Dodge, & Coppotelli, 1982). The score of positive nomina-
tions shows the degree of acceptance while negative nomi-
nations reveal
the degree of rejection. Acceptance and
rejection are considered to be two different indices repre-
senting two aspects of social integration because they are
moderately correlated to each other
(Bukowski &
Hoza, 1989).

As reﬂected by the framework of Rubin et al. (2006) and
Yeates et al. (2007), a large body of studies has shown that
children prefer to interact with peers manifesting socially
acceptable behavior (Bear, Manning, & Izard, 2003). In
other words, to be accepted by their peers, children must
demonstrate prosocial skills, good communication skills,
social problem solving, and self-regulation skills (Rose-
Krasnor & Denham, 2009; Rubin et al., 2006; Yeates et al.,
2007). Reviews provide evidence that prosocial skills
appear at an early age,
life
(Eisenberg, Fabes, & Spinrad, 2006; Paulus & Moore,
2012). The children who are less accepted by their peers
are often more aggressive and less cooperative than the
more accepted children (Brendgen et al., 2001; Mostow,
Izard, Fine, & Trentacosta, 2002; Stenseng, Belsky,

in the second year of

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

PsyCh Journal

59

Skalicka, & Wichstrøm, 2014). Thus, prosocial skills, com-
munication, and self-regulation skills promote positive
social interaction, which in turn acts on the social integra-
tion of children.

Cognitive self-regulation: Deﬁnition and

conceptualization

and

emotional

it

components

researchers agree that

Self-regulation is generally considered a multidimensional
construct (Blair, 2002; McClelland, Cameron Ponitz, Mes-
sersmith, & Tominey, 2010). The lack of consensus and the
semantic blur inherent in the self-regulation concept make
it sometimes difﬁcult to conceptualize (Allan, Hume, Allan,
Farrington, & Lonigan, 2014; Zhou, Chen, & Main, 2012).
Nevertheless,
self-regulation is
apprehended in the light of a speciﬁc application and in the
cognitive
involves
(Kochanska, Coy, & Murray, 2001). In the framework of
Blair and collaborators (Blair & Ursache, 2011; Ursache,
Blair, & Raver, 2012), self-regulation is represented by two
interrelated levels: (1) the executive functions play a top-
down role; and (2) in the bottom-up direction, the executive
functions depend on emotional control. In this perspective,
executive functions and emotional control are seen as dis-
tinct but strongly interrelated, and their development
is
closely linked to and inﬂuenced by experience. Generally
speaking, executive functions represent the “cognitive abil-
ities that are important for organizing information, for pla-
nning and problem solving, and for orchestrating thought
and action in goal-directed behavior” (Blair & Ursache,
2011, p. 300). Three executive components have been par-
ticularly investigated: inhibitory control, working memory,
and ﬂexibility (Garon, Bryson, & Smith, 2008). Inhibitory
control
is the ability to retain deliberately an automatic
response in order to activate a less predominant response.
Working memory allows one to retain spatial or verbal
information in one’s short memory and, at the same time,
to eliminate irrelevant information and make some changes
to this information. Flexibility represents the ability to
switch between different tasks and, more generally, between
mental operations (Diamond, 2013; Willoughby, Blair,
Wirth, & Greenberg, 2012). Emotional control refers to a
person’s ability to modulate their emotions (i.e., to control
their emotional reactivity) in response to their surrounding
environmental demands. In the literature,
to distinguish
these two levels, researchers use emotional self-regulation

(also referred to as “hot” self-regulation) and cognitive self-
regulation (also referred to as “cold” self-regulation) for
executive
(Denham, Warren-Khot, Bassett,
Wyatt, & Perna, 2012; Kim, Nordling, Yoon, Boldt, &
Kochanska, 2013).

functions

While the links between emotional self-regulation and
social functioning have been well studied, there are fewer
studies on the links between cognitive self-regulation and
social functioning. In addition, although emotional regula-
tion is more often involved than cognitive regulation in
social development (Di Norcia, Pecora, Bombi, Baumgart-
ner, & Laghi, 2015), some studies suggest links between
cognitive self-regulation and a distinct aspect of social
development.

Cognitive self-regulation, prosocial skills, and

social integration

inhibitory control

Aggression toward peers, a high activity level, and poor
regulation of impulses are considered to be typical externa-
lizing problems in childhood and to reﬂect antisocial beha-
viors (Campbell, 1990). Nigg, Quamma, Greenberg, and
Kusche (1999) showed that
in Grade
1 contributed to explaining externalizing behaviors assessed
in Grade 3, after controlling for sex, verbal ﬂuency, intelli-
gence, reading, and visuospatial skills. After controlling for
the reports of externalizing behaviors provided by teachers,
the child’s sex, and verbal and non-verbal
intelligence,
Riggs, Blair, and Greenberg (2003) found that inhibitory
control and ﬂexibility contributed to explaining 5% and
6%, respectively, of the variance changes in teacher judg-
ments on externalizing behaviors between the ﬁrst and sec-
ond grade. Other studies showed similar
relationships
between cognitive self-regulation and the level of aggres-
siveness in children and those who were “hard to manage”
(C. Hughes, Dunn, & White, 1998). C. Hughes, White,
Sharpen, and Dunn (2000) found that 4-year-old children
judged “hard to manage” (i.e. disruptive and hyperactive)
by their parents and teachers demonstrated lower perfor-
mance in executive skills (working memory, planning, ﬂex-
ibility, and inhibitory control) than their counterparts with
typical development. This performance difference was most
pronounced for inhibitory control. In addition, performance
in theory of mind tasks was not related to antisocial behav-
ior and empathy, which suggests, according to these
authors, that the difﬁculties in social skills of these young

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

60

Self-regulation and social functioning

children were mainly due to self-regulatory deﬁcits. Olson,
Lopez-Duran, Lunkenheimer, Chang, and Sameroff (2011)
obtained very similar results with children aged 3 years.
Using observations and evaluations by teachers,
they
showed that children with high levels of aggressive behav-
ior when interacting with their peers obtained lower scores
of cognitive and emotional regulations as well as theory of
mind than their peers without these aggressive behaviors.
In another study, aggressive children demonstrated a lower
inhibition performance than children with typical develop-
ment,
attention problems
(Raaijmakers et al., 2008). Aronen, Vuontela, Steenari,
Salmi, and Carlson (2005) showed that working memory
was associated with disruptive behaviors (e.g., difﬁculties
in concentrating and sitting still) assessed by the teachers
among children aged 6–8 years. This link was most pro-
nounced with the verbal working memory task than with
the spatial working memory task (see also Alloway, Gather-
cole, Kirkwood, & Elliott, 2009, for similar ﬁndings).

controlling for

even after

Similarly, associations between self-regulation skills and
prosocial behavior have been highlighted. In the study by
Dennis, Brotman, Huang, and Gouley (2007), both cogni-
tive and emotional regulations were associated with proso-
cial behavior indicated by parents. Razza and Blair (2009)
showed that for children aged 3–6.5 years, the results in an
inhibitory control task were moderately positively and sig-
niﬁcantly correlated with scores of social skills (social
cooperation, social interaction, and independence) assessed
by the teachers. In contrast, the scores obtained in a ﬂexi-
bility task were not linked to social skills. In the same vein,
Rhoades, Greenberg, and Domitrovich (2009) showed that
inhibitory control contributed to explaining the social skills
assessed by the teachers after vocabulary control.

Few studies have examined the relationships between
self-regulation and peer integration.
In the research of
C. Hughes and Ensor (2011) and Masten et al. (2012), cog-
nitive self-regulation (inhibitory control, working memory,
and planning) was associated with peer
relationships
assessed by the teachers. More recently, Acar, Rudasill,
Molfese, Torquati, and Prokasky (2015) found that self-
regulation (inhibitory control and attentional
focusing)
assessed by the mothers when the children were 3 years
old was negatively and signiﬁcantly associated with conﬂict
in peer relationships (observations at 4 years). It is even
more unusual to ﬁnd studies investigating the link between
self-regulation and peer acceptance assessed by the peers
themselves in young children. Olson and Lifgren (1998)

examined both concurrent and longitudinal associations
between self-regulation and peer acceptance among pre-
schoolers. Their ﬁndings showed a negative and signiﬁcant
correlation between negative nominations and emotional
regulation at Time 1. The more that children had high emo-
tional self-regulation skills, the less they were negatively
nominated by their peers. Negative nominations obtained at
Time 1 were negatively and signiﬁcantly associated with
emotional regulation and inhibitory control measured at
Time 2. Smith (2001) also found a signiﬁcant positive cor-
relation between emotional regulation and the average score
of positive and negative nominations. Very recently,
Holmes, Kim-Spoon, and Deater-Deckard (2016) showed
that the composite score of cognitive self-regulation (atten-
tion focusing, inhibitory control, attention problems, and
short memory) assessed at 4 years of age was negatively
associated with the composite score of peer problems (peer
rejection and peer victimization) at 6 years and, in turn, the
peer problems contributed to explaining the cognitive self-
regulation performance at 9–10 years.

Taken together, these results indicate that the three main
components (working memory, shifting, and inhibitory con-
trol) of cognitive self-regulation are associated with various
aspects of social functioning. Although inhibitory control
appears to be more strongly associated with social func-
tioning than working memory and shifting (Dennis et al.,
2007; C. Hughes et al., 1998; Nigg et al., 1999), both
working memory and inhibitory control seem to be associ-
ated with disruptive behaviors (Alloway et al., 2009; Aro-
nen et al., 2005) and peer relationships (Holmes et al.,
2016; Masten et al., 2012). Thus, in this study, we have
retained two components of cognitive self-regulation,
namely inhibitory control and working memory. Few inhib-
itory control and working memory measures are available
in French for children aged 5–6 years (Hubert, Guimard,
Florin, & Tracy, 2015). Therefore, we selected two mea-
sures validated in French that can be regarded as reliable
measures of cognitive self-regulation: the Backward Digit
Span and the Head–Toes–Knees–Shoulders (HTKS) task.

The Backward Digit Span is a subtest from the Wechsler
Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-IV; 4th ed.; Wechs-
ler, 2005) that assesses verbal working memory. In the
HTKS task (Ponitz, McClelland, Matthews, & Morrison,
2009), the child is faced with several conﬂicting instruc-
tions (i.e., doing the opposite of what they are asked to do)
and must give a motor response. Although we recognize
that this task evaluates more than just inhibitory control,

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

PsyCh Journal

61

the authors themselves consider it the main cognitive abil-
ity tapped by the task (Cameron Ponitz et al., 2008;
McClelland et al., 2007) and it is currently accepted as a
behavioral assessment of inhibitory control (e.g., Bindman,
Hindman, Bowles, & Morrison, 2013; Burrage et al., 2008;
Cameron et al., 2012; Caughy, Mills, Owen, & Hurst,
2013; Fuhs & McNeil, 2013; Lan, Legare, Ponitz, Li, &
Morrison, 2011). This decision is based on the fact that this
task is built on the principle of a tapping task. It is a com-
plex inhibition task also tapping working memory
(Carlson, 2003; Jones, Rothbart, & Posner, 2003) and prob-
ably some degree of attentional control, like many tasks
assessing executive function (Garon et al., 2008). Both
tasks require cold cognitive processes and do not call upon
any particular emotional or motivational aspects.

Sex as a potential moderator of the

relationship between cognitive self-regulation

and social functioning

Sex differences in peer relationships are seen at an early
age (i.e., 2 years old; Rose & Smith, 2009). Girls are gen-
erally judged to be more prosocial by their teachers, par-
ents, and peers and are more accepted by their peers
(Cillessen, 2009; Hay, Castle, Davies, Demetriou, & Stim-
son, 1999; Rose & Smith, 2009). In contrast, the literature
on the effect of sex on cognitive self-regulation remains
unclear but, when differences are found, girls typically
outperform boys (Gestsdottir et al., 2014; Hubert et al.,
2015). Several studies have shown that girls and boys
have similar performances in different
tasks of working
memory and inhibitory control among preschool children
(Caughy et al., 2013; Gathercole, Pickering, Ambridge, &
Wearing, 2004) and older children (Diamantopoulou,
Rydell, Thorell, & Bohlin, 2007). However, some studies
have indicated that girls outperform boys in inhibitory
control
tasks at preschool age (Berlin & Bohlin, 2002;
von Suchodoletz & Gunzenhauser, 2013). Few studies
have examined the potential sex differences in the cogni-
tive self-regulation–social functioning relationship but Dia-
found that girls with low
mantopoulou et al.
cognitive self-regulation abilities
(composite score of
working memory, inhibitory control, and verbal ﬂuency)
were less well accepted by their peers than boys with
equivalent self-regulation skills. Two other studies found
no differences in the pattern of association according to

(2007)

control

and

between

inhibitory

the child’s sex. Rhoades et al. (2009) indicated that the
relationship
social-
for boys and girls
emotional competence was similar
while Holmes et al. (2016) showed that
the association
between cognitive self-regulation and peer problems was
identical for girls and boys. As the ﬁndings remain uncer-
tain about the potential effect of sex, we investigated the
gender-moderated effect under consideration in the current
study.

Aims of the current study

and

peer

The transitional period between kindergarten and Grade
1 is characterized by a strong developmental evolution in
cognitive and social terms. To date, research has shown, on
one hand, links between social problem solving, prosocial
skills, and social
integration. More precisely, prosocial
skills and social problem solving promote social integra-
tion. On the other hand, research has also shown equal rela-
tionships between cognitive self-regulation and disruptive
behaviors as well as associations between cognitive self-
regulation and prosocial behavior and between cognitive
self-regulation
relationships. Relationships
between inhibitory control and peer acceptance and
between self-regulation and peer problems have also been
highlighted. However, few studies have investigated the
association between cognitive self-regulation and social
functioning using peer nominations. Moreover, prosocial
skills and social integration are essentially assessed by tea-
chers, but peers and teachers may have different points of
view. Thus, researchers agree that studies should include
multiple measurements from a variety of sources (Rhoades
et al., 2009). In the present research, we opted for a multi-
method study using the sociometric technique for an
assessment by peers and asking teachers to ﬁll in a ques-
tionnaire.1 In addition, some researchers argue that
the
sociometric method is the best one to investigate peer rela-
tionships (Crick, Casas, & Mosher, 1997; Perren & Alsa-
ker, 2006). Its undeniable advantages are a large number of
informants and information that is not only transmitted by
the teacher (Pepler & Craig, 1998). Clearly, multiple infor-
mants are always more reliable than a single informant. In
agreement with Hymel, Vaillancourt, McDougall, and
Renshaw (2002, p. 265), we believe that “sociometric mea-
sures offer a unique window into how individuals are
received within their social world.”

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

62

Self-regulation and social functioning

In addition, a large body of evidence indicates that girls
and boys differ in their social functioning and some studies
show that girls and boys differ in their inhibitory control
skills. However, the results remain unclear as to whether
this association between cognitive self-regulation and social
functioning is similar for boys and girls, so the current
study investigated the potential moderator of the child’s
sex. Thus, the objective was to understand better the com-
plex nature of the relationships between two components of
cognitive self-regulation, peer integration (peer acceptance
and rejection), and prosocial skills.

Three research questions were investigated:

1. What is the contribution of two components of cognitive
self-regulation assessed at Time 1 to explaining proso-
cial skills and social problem solving equally assessed
at Time 1, controlling for variables that are associated
with social functioning (maternal education, children’s
sex, age, and verbal and non-verbal IQ)? Based on pre-
vious research, we hypothesized that inhibitory control
would be more strongly associated with prosocial skills
and social problem solving than working memory.

skills and social

2. What is the contribution of the two components of cogni-
tive self-regulation assessed at Time 1 to explaining proso-
cial
integration assessed at Time
2, controlling for variables that are associated with social
functioning (maternal education, children’s sex, age, and
verbal and non-verbal IQ), social problem solving, and
prosocial skills assessed at Time 1? On one hand, we
hypothesized that social functioning evaluated in kinder-
garten would be strongly associated with that evaluated at
Grade 1. In the same way, we believed that inhibitory con-
trol would be more strongly associated with prosocial
skills and social integration than working memory but less
than the antecedent social functioning. On the other hand,
we hypothesized that components of cognitive self-
regulation would be more strongly associated with proso-
cial skills than social integration. This hypothesis is based
on the ﬁndings that prosocial skills and social integration
are relatively stable over time and, in the theoretical frame-
work of Yeates et al. (2007), prosocial skills act more
directly than cognitive abilities on social integration.

3. Does children’s sex moderate the association between cog-
nitive self-regulation and social functioning? Considering
the
research
(Diamantopoulou et al., 2007; Holmes et al., 2016;
Rhoades et al., 2009), we did not propose any prior
hypothesis.

contradictory

previous

results

of

Method

Participants
The study was based on complete data collected from
131 children (49% girls and 51% boys) followed from kin-
dergarten (Time 1) through Grade 1 of elementary school
(Time 2). Children were recruited from public primary
schools located in Nantes, a city in the west of France, and
the surrounding region. The children came from 16 classes
in kindergarten and 12 classes in Grade 1, from six differ-
ent public schools. In kindergarten, the average age was
68.36 months (SD = 3.33 months; range = 62–74 months).
A background questionnaire completed by the parents indi-
cated that for mothers, 38% had no secondary school
diploma at all. It further revealed that 17% had the equiva-
lent to a secondary school diploma, another 17% had an
undergraduate university degree, and 28% of mothers had a
graduate degree.

Procedure2
Parental written consent and the child’s oral consent were
obtained for each child participating in the study. Children
were assessed between February and mid-March in the kin-
dergarten year and between April and May in Grade 1. In
kindergarten, cognitive self-regulation skills were assessed
with the Backward Digit Span and the HTKS task. In addi-
tion, the teachers completed a questionnaire about social
problem solving and prosocial skills. In Grade 1, sociomet-
ric interviews were conducted to assess prosocial skills and
social integration (peer acceptance and rejection). In kin-
dergarten, all the testing was done individually, with identi-
cal conditions for each child. One evaluator took one child
at a time into a separate room at school to minimize dis-
tractions. Children completed these tasks in a 25-min ses-
sion, which included cognitive self-regulation tasks, as well
as verbal and non-verbal IQ measures. The sociometric
interviews were conducted in Grade 1 and were carried out
in a collective way. When the standard sociometric method
is used (i.e., when children are asked to name three peers
for each question), 70% participation is required for the
results to be interpretable (Cillessen, 2009). The Grade
1 children came from 12 different classes, ﬁve of which
were double-grade-level classes. Of these ﬁve classes, one
class included kindergarteners and children from Grade
1, while the other four classes had children from Grades
1 and 2. Finally, there were seven classes with only Grade

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

PsyCh Journal

63

1 students. Thus, for the needs of the sociometric inter-
views, data were also collected from the participants’ class-
mates. Seventy-nine children enrolled in kindergarten
(n = 19), Grade 1 (n = 35) and Grade 2 (n = 25) also parti-
cipated. The results of these 79 children were not consid-
ered in the subsequent statistical analysis. For 10 classes,
percentages greater than 70% participation (between 71%
and 100%) were obtained while for two classes, slightly
lower percentages, namely 65% and 68%, were obtained.
Children absent on the day of the collective interview were
interviewed individually afterwards to maximize the inter-
pretation of the results. The children were reassured regard-
ing the anonymity and the conﬁdentiality of their answers.
In the same way as many researchers, we limited the chil-
dren’s answers to three nominations and we authorized
cross-nominations between boys and girls (e.g., a boy could
circle the photo of a girl; Bossaert, Doumen, Buyse, &
Verschueren, 2011; Fink, Begeer, Hunt, & de Rosnay,
2014). Finally, the nominations were transformed into per-
centages of possible nominations in the class, and then
scores were standardized by class and sex.

Measures used at Time 1
Inhibitory control
To assess children’s inhibitory control in kindergarten, we
used a behavioral task: the HTKS (Ponitz et al., 2009). This
task requires children to provide a motor response to a ver-
bal command. In Part 1, two conﬂicting instructions are
presented to the child: Touch your toes, and touch your
head. When the examiner says, “Touch your toes,” the
child must touch his or her head and vice versa. In Part
2, new conﬂicting instructions are added to the ﬁrst two
instructions: Touch your shoulders and touch your knees.
The scoring system is the same for each of the two parts:
two points for a correct response, one point for a self-
correct (child corrects his or her response unprompted),
and a score of 0 for an incorrect response. The maximum
possible score for
the 20 items in kindergarten was
40 points. Higher scores indicate higher levels of self-
regulation skills (Cronbach’s α = .92).

Working memory
The Backward Digit Span, a subtest from the WISC-IV
(Wechsler, 2005), was used to assess verbal working mem-
ory. The child must repeat orally backward a series of digits
given by the experimenter at a rate of one digit per second.

Sequences range from 2 to 8 digits. The child receives one
point for each correct answer. The sum of correct answers
provides a maximum total score of 16 points. The higher
the children’s score, the greater are their verbal working
memory abilities (Cronbach’s α = .76).

Social skills assessed by teachers
We used two subscales of the Child Behavior Rating Scale
(Bronson, Goodson, Layzer, & Love, 1990; Matthews,
Ponitz, & Morrison, 2009): Interpersonal Skills (including
prosocial skills; seven items) and Social Problem Solving
(four items). Because the Interpersonal Skills subscale eval-
uates a construct very similar to that of prosocial skills, we
called this subscale Prosocial Skills in this study. Sample
items of Prosocial Skills included “Cooperative with play-
mates when participating in a group play activity; willing
to give and take in the group, to listen to or help others”
and “Takes turns in a game situation with toys, materials,
and other things without being told to do so.” For the sub-
scale about social problem solving, sample items included
“Resolves potential social conﬂicts with peers without
requiring help from the teacher or other adult” and “Can
deal with normal criticism or teasing by other children;
does not easily cry, withdraw, pout, hit, or have a tantrum
in response.” The two subscales were completed by kinder-
garten teachers. Ratings were made by circling the response
number that best indicates how frequently the child exhibits
the behavior described in a particular item on a 5-point
scale ranging from 1 (the child never exhibits the behavior
described by the item) to 5 (the child always exhibits the
behavior described by the item). The higher the children’s
score, the greater are their social skills (Cronbach’s α = .84
for Prosocial Skills and .66 for Social Problem Solving).

Verbal IQ and non-verbal IQ
Verbal IQ was assessed in kindergarten with Peabody’s
Vocabulary Scale (Dunn, Thériault-Whalen, & Dunn,
1993), the French-language adaptation of the Peabody Pic-
ture Vocabulary Test (revised by Dunn & Dunn, 1981). It
is recognized as combining the best psychometric measure-
ment for a French vocabulary test (Bouchard, Fitzpatrick, &
Olds, 2009). In order to create a composite score, we pre-
sented Items 30 (nest) to 67 (trunk) to the children. The
total score was out of 37 (Cronbach’s α = .76).

Non-verbal

Raven’s

IQ was assessed in kindergarten using
in

(1998) Colored Progressive Matrices

test

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

64

Self-regulation and social functioning

notebook form. This test is a classic task that evaluates a
child’s non-verbal perceptive reasoning. Children must
solve three series of non-verbal problems of increasing
complexity. For each of the 36 items proposed (12 per
series), the child was instructed to choose the one item that
provided the solution to the problem from six proposals.
The total possible score was 36 (Cronbach’s α = .80).

Measures used at Time 2
Social integration
We identiﬁed social integration through two characteristics:
peer acceptance and rejection. We were inspired by the ques-
tions of Boivin and Bégin (1986) to establish a questionnaire
of six items: three for peer acceptance and three for peer rejec-
tion. In their study conducted with children aged 5–6 years,
the temporal reliability of the responses was satisfactory. The
children had to circle three images of their classmates for each
item by means of a booklet with the photographs and names
of their classmates. To ensure that the children recognized all
their classmates in the photos, the experimenters ﬁrst named
them all individually out loud. Children were instructed to cir-
cle the photos of three of their classmates in the booklet for
each question. They were allowed to choose fewer but no
more than three photos and they could not circle themselves.
They were asked to circle successively three classmates they
most like to play with at recreation time (positive nomina-
tions), three classmates they least like to play with at recrea-
tion time (negative nominations), those they would most (and
then least) like to invite home for their birthday party, and
ﬁnally those to whom they would most (and then least) like to
sit next to in class. To obtain consistent answers, the children
circled on the same page for each dimension (play with,
invite, sit next to) the three peers for positive nominations
with a blue-colored pen and the three peers for negative nomi-
nations with the color of their choice. Two scores were calcu-
lated for each child: an acceptance score and a rejection score.
The acceptance score is the sum of the nominations for the
three items of positive nominations (r = .62–.75, p < .001)
and the rejection score is the sum of the nominations for the
three items of negative nominations (r = .68–.75, p < .001).
Cronbach’s α’s for these two scores were good (.87 for accept-
ance and .88 for rejection).

Prosocial skills
A questionnaire on social reputation (Lapointe, Noêl, &
Strayer, 1993) was used, which evaluates how children

perceive their peers on ﬁve social dimensions: Mood, Lead-
ership, Aggression, Cooperation, and Popularity. Popularity
was not used in the analysis because it echoes acceptance
(r = .64, p < .001) and rejection (r = –.72, p < .001). The
Leadership dimension was not retained either because it
represents a fairly subtle phenomenon for 6–7-year-old
children to spot. Two questions were asked for each dimen-
sion, one on the positive valence (i.e., good mood, non-
aggressive, cooperative) and the other on the negative
valence (i.e., bad mood, aggressive, uncooperative). In this
questionnaire, children were allowed to nominate them-
selves. The principle was the same as for the questionnaire
of peer acceptance and rejection: Children had a booklet
with the photographs and names of their classmates and
had to use a different colored pen for the positive and nega-
tive valences. Each child obtained two scores per dimen-
sion, one on the positive valence and one on the negative
valence. Like Lapointe et al. (1993), we subtracted the neg-
ative valence from the positive valence score to obtain three
indices: positive mood, cooperative, and non-aggressive
(r = .49–.65, p < .001). Then, these three indicators were
summarized in a prosocial behavior composite score
(Cronbach’s α = .81).

Analytical strategy
Analyses were carried out using SPSS 20. There were
no missing data. Descriptive analyses are provided in
Table 1; they do not indicate deviations from normality
for all the variables of the study. Then, bivariate corre-
lation and hierarchical regression analyses were used to
test models predicting social functioning. Each aspect
of social functioning was analyzed in a separate model.
In order to test sex moderator effects, interaction terms
(Sex × Inhibitory Control and Sex × Verbal Working
Memory) were derived by computing standardized z-
scores to center
the data and then multiplying the
z-scores for the two variables (Aiken & West, 1991).

Results

Correlations between all the variables of the
study
The inhibitory control scores obtained during kindergarten
were moderately correlated to prosocial skills (r = .28,
p < .01, see Table 2) and social problem solving (r = .45,
p < .001)
assessed by kindergarten teachers. Verbal

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

PsyCh Journal

65

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics for all the Variables of the Study

Outcomes

Inhibitory control, kindergarten
Verbal working memory, kindergarten
Non-verbal IQ, kindergarten
Verbal IQ, kindergarten
Prosocial skills, kindergarten
Social problem solving, kindergarten
Prosocial skills, Grade 1
Acceptance, Grade 1
Rejection, Grade 1

Mean

25.37
3.28
18.43
27.93
3.94
3.49
0.13
0.12
0.001

SD

10.57
1.88
4.72
3.90
0.68
0.62
2.40
0.90
0.96

Range

Skewness

Kurtosis

0–40
0–8
5–32
15–35
2.14–5
2.25–5
–5.19 to 5.74
–1.31 to 2.48
–2.16 to 2.67

–0.80
–0.40
0.07
–0.75
–0.47
0.01
–0.24
0.51
1.06

–0.18
–0.40
0.34
0.49
–0.64
–0.53
–0.33
–0.49
0.55

working memory scores were also correlated to prosocial
skills and social problem solving but less strongly (r = .22,
p < .05 and r = .35, p < .001, respectively).

skills

The inhibitory control scores obtained during kindergarten
were correlated positively to prosocial
(r = .35,
p < .001) and peer acceptance (r = .29, p < .01) assessed by
peers in Grade 1. A negative correlation was observed
between inhibitory control scores and rejection by peers
(r = –.23, p < .01). In contrast, the correlations were more
mixed between verbal working memory and social function-
ing assessed by peers. In fact, the verbal working memory
scores assessed in kindergarten were only associated with pro-
social skills assessed by peers in Grade 1 (r = .17, p < .05).

The prosocial skills assessed by teachers were moder-
ately associated with prosocial skills (r = .30, p < .001),
peer acceptance (r = .60, p < .001), and peer rejection
(r = –.49, p < .001) assessed by peers in Grade 1. In the
same way, social problem solving was also linked to proso-
cial skills (r = .31, p < .001), peer acceptance (r = .31,
p < .001), and peer rejection (r = –.25, p < .001).

Only the prosocial skills and social problem solving
assessed by teachers were linked to sex (r = .26, p < .01

and r = .25, p < .01, respectively). Social problem solving
was
level
(r = .22, p < .05).

associated with

the mother’s

education

A series of hierarchical regression analyses of cognitive
self-regulation variables (i.e., inhibitory control and verbal
working memory) were regressed on child social function-
ing (i.e., prosocial skills assessed by teachers, social
problem solving assessed by teachers, and prosocial skills,
peer acceptance, and rejection assessed by peers). The
results are presented in Tables 3 and 4. Analyses were
completed in different blocks. For concurrent analyses,
children’s sex, IQ, and mother’s education were entered ﬁrst
to serve as control variables when they were signiﬁcantly
correlated with the social
functioning outcome. Main
effects for cognitive self-regulation were centered in the
second block and two-way interaction terms were centered
in the third block. For longitudinal analyses, children’s sex,
IQ, and mother’s education were also entered ﬁrst to serve
as control variables. Prosocial skills and social problem
solving were entered in the second block to control the
antecedent of the social functioning effect. Finally, main
effects for cognitive self-regulation were centered in the

Table 2
Correlations Between the Different Variables

2

1
– 0.22*

_

1-Age
2-Sex
3-Mother’s education
4-Inhibitory control T1
5-Verbal working memory T1
6-Non-verbal IQ T1
7-Verbal IQ T1
8-Prosocial skills T1
9-Social problem solving T1
10-Prosocial skills T2
11-Acceptance T2
12-Rejection T2

3

4

5

0.05 0.15
–0.03 0.16
_

0.10
0.12
0.17* 0.10
_

0.42***
_

7

0.15
0.12
0.23*

6
0.18*
–0.09
0.16
0.32*** 0.37***
0.30**
0.24**
0.29**
_
_

8

9

10

11

12

0.14

0.05
0.05
0.02

–0.00
0.26** 0.25**
0.22*
0.05
0.28** 0.45*** 0.35***
0.22*
0.06
0.17
_

0.35*** 0.17*
0.40*** 0.18*
0.36*** 0.14
0.52*** 0.30***
0.31***
_
_

0.07
–0.00
0.13
0.29**
0.12
0.28**
0.16
0.60***
0.31***
0.59***
_

0.01
–0.10
–0.00
–0.23**
–0.05
–0.09
–0.03
–0.49***
–0.25***
–0.62***
–0.36***
_

Note. T1 = Time 1 (kindergarten); T2 = Time 2 (Grade 1).
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

66

Self-regulation and social functioning

Table 3
Hierarchical Regression Analyses
Assessed in Kindergarten

for Predicting Social Functioning

Table 4
Hierarchical Regression Analyses
Assessed in Grade 1

for Predicting Social Functioning

Prosocial skills
β

t

.26

3.05**

.07

.20
.11
.14

–.02
.08
.14

2.19*
1.25

–0.20
0.91

Social

problem
solving
t

β

3.51**
1.55
2.43*
4.41***

1.50
1.37

0.19
0.32

.27
.12
.19
.35
.30

.14
.10
.37

.02
.03
.37

Variable
Block 1
Sex
Mother’s education
Verbal IQ
Non-verbal IQ
Total R2
Block 2
Inhibitory control
Verbal working memory
Total R2
Block 3
Inhibitory Control × Sex
Verbal Working Memory × Sex
Total R2
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.

third block and two-way interaction terms were centered in
the fourth block. Working memory was not signiﬁcantly
linked with any variables of social integration, so was not
integrated in the last two models. Children’s age was not
signiﬁcantly correlated with any of the social functioning
outcomes, so was not presented in hierarchical regression
analyses as a control variable.

Concurrent relationships between inhibitory
control, verbal working memory, and social
problem solving and prosocial skills assessed
by teachers
Prosocial skills
Children’s sex (β = .26, p < .01) and inhibitory control
(β = .20, p < .05) were signiﬁcantly and positively associ-
ated with prosocial skills. The effect of sex indicated that
teachers judged girls more favorably than boys on this
social dimension. Scores on the verbal working memory
task were not signiﬁcantly associated with prosocial skills
(β = .11, p = .21).
In accordance with our hypothesis,
inhibitory control contributed more to explaining prosocial
skills than verbal working memory.

Social problem solving
Verbal IQ was the strongest predictor of social problem
solving (β = .35, p < .001), followed by children’s sex
(β = .27, p < .01), and mother’s education level (β = .19,
p < .05). The effect of sex also showed that teachers judged

Prosocial

skills
t

β

Peer

acceptance Peer rejection
β

β

t

t

.18 2.06*
.03

.28 3.37**
.08

.60 7.09*** .23 2.41* –.48 –5.32***
–.07 –0.73
.39

–.03 –0.03
.24

.10 0.96
.18

.21 2.53*
–.04 –0.47
.40

.14 1.50

–.10 –1.17

.18

.25

–.10 –1.36
–.14 1.77

.02 0.19
.03 0.32

.13 1.56
–.15 –1.77

Variable
Block 1
Non-verbal IQ
Total R2
Block 2
Prosocial skills
Social problem solving
Total R2
Block 3
Inhibitory control
Verbal working memory
Total R2
Block 4
Inhibitory Control × Sex
Verbal Working

Memory × Sex

Total R2
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.

.40

.18

.28

girls more able than boys to resolve social problems. None
of the cognitive self-regulation main effects (inhibitory con-
trol and verbal working memory scores) signiﬁcantly pre-
dicted social problem solving (β = .14, p = .17 and
β = .10, p = .22, respectively).

In contrast to our hypothesis, none of the components of
associated with social

self-regulation was

cognitive
problem solving.

Longitudinal relationship between inhibitory
control, verbal working memory, and prosocial
skills and social integration assessed by peers
1 year later
Prosocial skills
Prosocial skills measured in kindergarten (Time 1) pre-
dicted prosocial skills in Grade 1 (Time 2, β = .60,
p < .001), as did inhibitory control assessed in kindergarten
(β = .21, p < .05) and non-verbal IQ (β = .18, p < .05).
Scores on the verbal working memory task assessed in kin-
dergarten were not signiﬁcantly associated with prosocial
skills measured 1 year later (β = –.04, p = .64). In accord-
ance with our hypothesis, prosocial skills assessed in kin-
dergarten contributed more to explaining prosocial skills
measured 1 year later than inhibitory control.

Peer acceptance
Non-verbal IQ was the strongest predictor of peer accept-
ance (β = .28, p < .01)
skills

followed by prosocial

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

PsyCh Journal

67

assessed in kindergarten (β = .23, p < .05). Scores on the
inhibitory task assessed in kindergarten were not signiﬁ-
cantly associated with peer acceptance measured 1 year
later (β = .14, p = .14).

Peer rejection
Only the prosocial skills assessed by teachers in kindergarten
were associated with peer rejection measured in Grade 1 by
peers (β = –.48, p < .001). Thus, the children considered by
their teachers as having high interpersonal skills in kindergar-
ten were less rejected by their peers in Grade 1 unlike those
judged less favorably by their teachers. In the same way as
peer acceptance, scores on the inhibitory task assessed in kin-
dergarten were not signiﬁcantly associated with peer rejection
measured 1 year later (β = –.10, p = .25).

In contrast to our hypothesis, none of the components of
cognitive self-regulation was associated with peer accept-
ance assessed 1 year later.

Sex as a potential moderator of the relationship
between cognitive self-regulation and social
functioning
None of the interactions terms (Sex × Inhibitory Control
and Sex × Verbal Working Memory) was signiﬁcant
in
any of the ﬁve models. These ﬁndings suggest that the rela-
tionships between inhibitory control and social functioning
and between working memory and social functioning are
similar for girls and boys.

Discussion

The current study aimed to examine the relationships
between two components of cognitive self-regulation and
social functioning and to test a potential sex moderator
effect among 131 French children between kindergarten
and ﬁrst grade.

Concurrent relationships between inhibitory
control, working memory, and social problem
solving and prosocial skills
The ﬁndings of this study indicated that inhibitory control
was more strongly associated with social functioning than
verbal working memory. Indeed, inhibitory control contrib-
uted to explaining both prosocial skills assessed by teachers
and by peers. These results suggest that the inhibition of a
predominant response in favor of the requested action as

the more salient

assessed in the HTKS task is more explanatory of prosocial
skills than levels of verbal and non-verbal intelligence and
mother’s education. Several studies have shown that inhibi-
tory control, including motor inhibitory control as in the
HTKS task, is associated with social skills assessed by tea-
chers (Dennis et al., 2007; Masten et al., 2012; Rhoades
et al., 2009) and more so than working memory and ﬂexi-
bility (Nigg et al., 1999; Razza & Blair, 2009; Riggs et al.,
2003). Another explanation for
link
between inhibitory control and social functioning is related
to the fact that inhibitory control is involved in both cogni-
tive and emotional regulation, which is not the case for
working memory (Eisenberg, Hofer, & Vaughan, 2007;
Zhou et al., 2012). Emotion self-regulation is strongly
linked to social functioning (Denham, Bassett, Sirotkin,
Brown, & Morris, 2015; Di Norcia et al., 2015). However,
the working memory task also taps inhibitory control.
Indeed,
restrain their automatism to
repeat forward, in order to activate the requested answer: to
repeat the digits backward. It is most likely that the vari-
ance attributable to non-executive processes inﬂuenced the
relationship between the two components of cognitive self-
regulation and prosocial skills. The most relevant distinc-
tion is the motor skill for HTKS versus the verbal skill for
the Backward Digit Span.
In the study by Rhoades
et al. (2009), the Pencil Tap task (behavioral inhibitory
control) was more strongly associated with prosocial skills
assessed by teachers than the Day/Night task (verbal inhibi-
tory control). Thus, motor action is probably more helpful
in acting prosocially (e.g., being non-aggressive, waiting
one’s turn). We can also suggest that the HTKS task is
probably more ecologically similar to the social context
than the Backward Digit Span. The HTKS task requires
simultaneous gross motor actions, and social and cognitive
demands (McClelland et al., 2014).

the children must

These ﬁndings show the multidimensional nature of the
self-regulation construct. The various components of self-
regulation can have differential effects on the developmen-
tal aspects of children (Kim et al., 2013).

In contrast, inhibitory control and working memory were
not associated with social problem solving. This ﬁnding
goes against the results from previous research. Crick and
Dodge (1994) indicated that children who are quicker at
regulating their behaviors will be able to understand others
and develop skills related to communication in conﬂictual
situations. In return, they will be perceived as socially com-
petent by their peers and their teachers. Eisenberg, Fabes,

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

68

Self-regulation and social functioning

Nyman, Bernzweig, and Pinuelas (1994) found that pre-
schoolers engaging in more constructive methods of social
conﬂict resolution were better liked by their peers. How-
ever, in our study, although inhibitory control and working
memory were associated with social problem solving, it did
not help to explain it beyond sex and verbal and non-verbal
IQ. It may be that our assessment of social problem solving
was not relevant enough to encompass the complexity of
this construct. According to Yeates, Schultz, and Selman
(1991), four elements need to be taken into account: deﬁne
the problem, generate alternative strategies, select and
implement a speciﬁc strategy, and evaluate the strategy’s
outcome. However, our assessment is much more compre-
hensive and reﬂects the ability to solve social problems in
general.

teachers

are

relationships with their

Longitudinal relationships between cognitive
self-regulation and social functioning
Prosocial skills assessed by teachers in kindergarten were
the best predictor of prosocial skills and peer rejection
assessed by peers 1 year later and were also associated with
peer acceptance. Beyond the relatively stable development
of social functioning, these ﬁndings may reﬂect the tea-
cher’s inﬂuence on the student’s social reputation. Several
studies have consistently shown that children who have
conﬂictual
less
accepted by their peers and this disharmonious relationship
between the student and teacher has an impact beyond the
student’s aggressive behaviors (J. N. Hughes, Cavell, &
Willson, 2001; White & Jones, 2000). In other terms, chil-
dren conform to and adopt the judgments of their teachers
with regard to their peers (Chang et al., 2007). The tea-
cher’s inﬂuence on the social integration of the student has
been called the phenomenon of “the invisible hand”
(Farmer, McAuliffe Lines, & Hamm, 2011). Recent evi-
dence suggests a reciprocal effect of this phenomenon. For
example, De Laet et al. (2014) showed a reciprocal rela-
tionship between peer relationships and teacher–child con-
ﬂict in middle childhood. In line with this assumption, a
growing body of research shows that low cognitive self-
regulation abilities are associated with a high level of con-
ﬂictual
relationships (e.g., Berry, 2012;
Rudasill & Rimm-Kaufman, 2009; Schmitt, Pentimonti, &
Justice, 2012).

teacher–student

The fact that, on one hand, inhibitory control predicted
prosocial skills and, on the other hand, prosocial skills were
associated with peer acceptance and rejection leads us to

integration. The model

the following hypothesis: We can assume that inhibitory
control acts on prosocial skills, which in turn act on peer
acceptance and rejection. So, it is possible that prosocial
skills mediate the relationship between inhibitory control
and social integration. Children who are able to regulate
their behaviors would develop more harmonious interac-
tions with their peers and would therefore integrate more
easily into their peer groups. This hypothesis is in accord-
ance with the framework of Rubin et al. (2006) and Yeates
in their three-level model, social
et al. (2007). Indeed,
problem solving affects the social skills that
inﬂuence
social
is bi-directional, because
social integration affects social skills that enhance social
problem solving. Although the ﬁrst level in the model is
called “social problem solving,” the authors agree that this
involves cognitive self-regulation. However, to our knowl-
edge, no empirical study has tested this mediating relation-
ship between cognitive self-regulation, prosocial skills, and
social
integration. The results of Rotenberg, Michalik,
Eisenberg, and Betts (2008) are a step in this direction.
They found that
trustworthiness (promise keeping and
secret keeping), which is a characteristic that is positively
related to friendship and peer
acceptance, partially
mediated the relationships between inhibitory control and
adjustment in the classroom among 5-year-old children.

In addition, according to a theoretical model proposed
by Yeates et al. (2007), the link between inhibitory control
and prosocial skills could be partly mediated by the mental
understanding of others, especially the theory of mind.
Higher cognitive self-regulation predicted higher theory of
mind (Fahie & Symons, 2003; C. Hughes & Ensor, 2007a;
Sabbagh, Xu, Carlson, Moses, & Lee, 2006). In the study
of Carlson, Moses, and Breton (2002), inhibitory control
predicted more false beliefs (tasks assessing the theory of
mind) than working memory,
intelligence, an emotional
control task, and children’s age. Moreover, theory of mind
is itself associated with a deﬁcit in social functioning, such
as externalizing problem behaviors (C. Hughes & Ensor,
2007b).

Children’s sex as a potential moderator of the
association between cognitive self-regulation
and social functioning
Our results failed to bring out a sex-moderator effect. This
ﬁnding tends to conﬁrm those studies reporting a similar
relationship between cognitive self-regulation and social
functioning in boys and girls (Holmes et al., 2016; Rhoades

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

PsyCh Journal

69

et al., 2009). The current study shows that although girls
were judged more favorably than boys on prosocial skills
and social problem solving, the relationships between com-
ponents of cognitive self-regulation and aspects of social
functioning were similar across sexes. In addition, our pre-
vious research indicated that inhibitory scores of girls and
boys assessed with the HTKS task did not differ signiﬁ-
cantly in nursery school or early elementary school
(Gestsdottir et al., 2014; Hubert et al., 2015).

seem to be able to consider all aspects of aggression
(Rogosch & Newcomb, 1989). They rely on observable
behavior that is easier to spot (i.e., externalizing behaviors,
such as aggression, and the observations and judgments of
teachers; White & Jones, 2000). Relational aggression is
typically harder to spot than overt aggression; the behaviors
are subtler. It would also be interesting to investigate
whether prosocial skills mediate the relationship between
inhibitory control and social integration.

Limitations and perspectives
This study adds to the literature on the relationship between
two components of cognitive self-regulation and social
functioning using a multi-method approach. This choice
revealed the views of both peers and teachers about chil-
dren’s social functioning. However, several limitations must
be mentioned. First, the number of measures of cognitive
self-regulation was limited to one task of inhibitory control
and one task of working memory. Second, the present study
was not able to take into account
the shared variances
either for components of cognitive self-regulation or for
aspects of social functioning. This was not possible given
the number of variables and the size of the sample. Finally,
the current study used a correlational pattern and was not
able to examine causality. More research is needed to
understand further the causal relationships between compo-
nents of cognitive self-regulation and social functioning
using randomized trials. It would be beneﬁcial if future
studies could investigate the reciprocal process with at least
three measurement
there have been
many ﬁndings in this vein. On one hand, there is a recipro-
cal relationship between peer relationships and social skills
(Hay, Payne, & Chadwick, 2004). On the other hand, par-
enting plays a crucial role in the development of self-
regulation (Roskam, Stievenart, Meunier, & Noël, 2014).

time-points. Indeed,

It would also be useful if future studies could distinguish
relational and overt aggression because the former is more
characteristic of girls (Crick & Grotpeter, 1995; Crick
et al., 2006). Crick and Grotpeter (1995) distinguished rela-
tional aggression (spreading a nasty rumor about a peer),
also called social aggression (Galen & Underwood, 1997)
or indirect aggression (Card, Stucky, Sawalani, & Little,
2008; Vaillancourt, Brendgen, Boivin, & Tremblay, 2003)
from overt aggression (kicking, verbal insults, etc.). How-
ever, there is a signiﬁcant overlap between these two types
of aggression at the preschool age (Crick et al., 1997). Fur-
thermore, young children in early elementary school do not

self-regulation,

especially inhibitory control

Conclusion
The current study revealed three major ﬁndings. First,
inhibitory control was associated concurrently and longi-
tudinally with prosocial skills assessed by peers using the
sociometric technique as well as by teachers. Second, the
prosocial skills assessed by teachers in kindergarten con-
tributed more to explaining prosocial skills than compo-
nents of cognitive self-regulation. Finally, sex did not
moderate the relationships between components of cogni-
tive
and
social functioning. Taken together, these results indicate
the need to enhance motor inhibitory control and proso-
cial skills at an early age to help children to develop har-
monious peer relationships and, more generally, for their
well-being (Mofﬁtt et al., 2011; Nangle & Erdley, 2001).
This is a major concern because rejected children are
considered to be particularly at
risk of victimization
(Hodges, Malone, & Perry, 1997; Hodges & Perry, 1999;
Ladd & Troop-Gordon, 2003; Pellegrini, Bartini, &
Brooks, 1999). Moreover, peer rejection and victimization
are associated with a lack of motivation, decline in aca-
demic achievement, and school avoidance (Graham, Bell-
more, & Mize, 2006; Kochenderfer & Ladd, 1996;
Nishina, Juvonen, & Witkow, 2005).

North American researchers have developed a number of
programs to promote social and emotional skills (see
Blair & Diamond, 2008). Among these,
the Promoting
Alternative Thinking Strategies Program (Domitrovich &
Greenberg, 2000) is intended for children aged 3–6 years.
It consists of 30 sessions of lessons and activities designed
to educate children about literacy and emotion knowledge
and help them to develop positive relationships with their
peers. In addition, the program seeks to promote the devel-
opment of a positive self-concept and self-regulation skills.
Domitrovich, Cortes, and Greenberg (2007) have shown
that children who have completed this program have a
greater understanding of their emotions.

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

70

Self-regulation and social functioning

Disclosure of conﬂict of interest

The authors declare that there are no conﬂicts of interest.

Notes

1All aspects of social functioning have not been measured
in the same way at Time 1 and Time 2. We were unable to
led sociometric interview at Time 1. In kindergarten, chil-
dren came from 16 different classes, of which 12 were mix
grade level classes. Of these 12, one class included pre-
schoolers, pre-kindergarteners and kindergarteners, one
class included preschoolers and kindergarteners, while the
other 10 classes included pre-kindergarteners and kinder-
garteners. Finally, there were 4 classes with only kindergar-
teners. Seventy percent participation is required for the
results to interpretable, so we need to have all the responses
of the classmates. It would have been difﬁcult with pre-
school children to conduct sociometric interviews.
2Because academic institutions in France do not always
have ethics committees for psychological research, no for-
mal ethical review of the procedure was conducted. The
authors did, however, present their research to their peers
for comments on their project, the normal practice at the
Faculty of Psychology, University of Nantes.

References

Acar,

I. H., Rudasill, K. M., Molfese, V., Torquati, J., &
Prokasky, A. (2015). Temperament and preschool children’s
peer
interactions. Early Education and Development, 26,
479–495. doi:10.1080/10409289.2015.1000718

Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing

and interpreting interactions. Newberry Park, CA: Sage.

Allan, N. P., Hume, L. E., Allan, D. M., Farrington, A. L., &
Lonigan, C. J. (2014). Relations between inhibitory control and
the development of academic skills in preschool and kindergar-
ten: A meta-analysis. Developmental Psychology,
50,
2368–2379. doi:10.1037/a0037493

Alloway, T. P., Gathercole, S. E., Kirkwood, H., & Elliott, J.
(2009). The cognitive and behavioral characteristics of children
with low working memory. Child Development, 80, 606–621.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01282.x

Aronen, E. T., Vuontela, V., Steenari, M.-R., Salmi, J., &
Carlson, S. (2005). Working memory, psychiatric symptoms,
and academic performance at school. Neurobiology of Learning
and Memory, 83, 33–42. doi:10.1016/j.nlm.2004.06.010

Arseneault, L., Bowes, L., & Shakoor, S. (2010). Bullying vic-
timization in youths and mental health problems: ‘Much ado
717–729.
about
doi:10.1017/S0033291709991383

nothing’? Psychological Medicine,

40,

Asher, S. R., Paquette MacEvoy, J., & McDonald, K. L. (2008).
Children’s peer relations, social competence, and school adjust-
ment: A social
In
M. L. Maehr, S. Karabenick, & T. Urdan (Eds.), Advances in
motivation and achievement: Vol. 15. Social psychological
perspectives (pp. 357–390). Bingley: Emerald.

tasks and social goals perspective.

Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong:
Desire for interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human
motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–529. doi:10.1037
/0033-2909.117.3.497

Bear, G. G., Manning, M. A., & Izard, C. E. (2003). Responsible
behavior: The importance of social cognition and emotion.
School Psychology Quarterly, 18, 140–157. doi:10.1521
/scpq.18.2.140.21857

Berlin, L., & Bohlin, G. (2002). Response inhibition, hyperactiv-
ity, and conduct problems among preschool children. Journal
of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 31, 242–251.
doi:10.1207/153744202753604511

Berry, D. (2012). Inhibitory control and teacher–child con-
ﬂict: Reciprocal associations across the elementary-school
years. Journal of Psychology, 33, 66–76. doi:10.1016
/j.appdev.2011.10.002

Bindman, S. W., Hindman, A. H., Bowles, R. P., &
Morrison, F. J. (2013). The contributions of parental manage-
language to executive function in preschool children.
ment
529–539.
Early Childhood
doi:10.1016/J.ecresq.2013.03.003

Research Quarterly,

28,

Blair, C. (2002). School readiness: Integrating cognition and emo-
tion in a neurobiological conceptualization of children’s func-
tioning at school entry. American Psychologist, 57, 111–127.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.57.2.111

Blair, C., & Diamond, A. (2008). Biological processes in preven-
tion and intervention: The promotion of self-regulation as a
means of preventing school failure. Development and Psycho-
pathology, 20, 899–911. doi:10.1017/S0954579408000436

functions

Blair, C., & Ursache, A. (2011). A bidirectional model of execu-
In K. D. Vohs &
self-regulation:
theory, and applications (2nd ed., pp. 300–320).

tive
R. F. Baumeister
Research,
New York, NY: Guilford Press.

(Eds.), Handbook of

and self-regulation.

Boivin, M., & Bégin, G. (1986). Temporal reliability and validity
of three sociometric status assessments with young children.
Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science/Revue canadienne
des sciences du comportement, 18, 167–172. doi:10.1037
/h0079977

Bossaert, G., Doumen, S., Buyse, E., & Verschueren, K. (2011).
Predicting children’s academic achievement after the transition
to ﬁrst grade: A two-year longitudinal study. Journal of Applied
doi:10.1016
Developmental
/j.appdev.2010.12.002

Psychology,

32,

47–57.

Bouchard, M.-E. G., Fitzpatrick, E. M., & Olds, J. (2009). Ana-
lyse psychométrique d’outils d’évaluation utilisés auprès d’en-
fants francophones [Psychometric analysis of evaluation tools
used with French-speaking children]. Canadian Journal of
Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology/Revue canadienne
d’orthophonie et d’audiologie, 33, 129–139.

Brendgen, M., Vitaro, F., Bukowski, W. M., Doyle, A. B., &
Markiewicz, D. (2001). Developmental proﬁles of peer social
preference over the course of elementary school: Associations

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

PsyCh Journal

71

with trajectories of externalizing and internalizing behavior.
doi:10.1037
Developmental
/0012-1649.37.3.308

Psychology,

308–320.

37,

Bronson, M. B., Goodson, B. D., Layzer, J. I., & Love, J. M.
(1990). Child Behavior Rating Scale. Cambridge, MA: Abt
Associates.

Bukowski, W. M., & Hoza, B. (1989). Popularity and friendship:
Issues in theory, measurement, and outcome. In T. J. Berndt &
G. W. Ladd (Eds.), Peer relationships in child development
(pp. 15–45). Oxford, UK: Wiley & Sons.

Burrage, M. S., Ponitz, C. C., McCready, E. A., Shah, P.,
Sims, B. C., Jewkes, A. M., & Morrison, F. J. (2008). Age-
and schooling-related effects on executive functions in young
children: A natural experiment. Child Neuropsychology, 14,
510–524. doi:10.1080/09297040701756917

Cameron, C. E., Brock, L. L., Murrah, W. M., Bell, L. H.,
Worzalla, S. L., Grissmer, D., & Morrison, F. J. (2012). Fine
motor skills and executive function both contribute to kinder-
garten achievement. Child Development, 83, 1229–1244.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2012.01768.x

Cameron Ponitz, C. E., McClelland, M. M., Jewkes, A. M.,
Connor, C. M., Farris, C. L., & Morrison, F. J. (2008). Touch
your toes! Developing a direct measure of behavioral regulation
in early childhood. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 23,
141–158. doi:10.1016/j.ecresq.2007.01.004

Campbell, S. B. (1990). Behavior problems in preschool children:
Clinical and developmental issues. New York, NY: Guilford
Press.

Card, N. A., Stucky, B. D., Sawalani, G. M., & Little, T. D. (2008).
Direct and indirect aggression during childhood and adolescence:
A meta-analytic review of gender differences, intercorrelations,
and relations
to maladjustment. Child Development, 79,
1185–1229. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2008.01184.x

Carlson, S. M. (2003). Executive function in context: Develop-
ment, measurement, theory, and experience. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 68, 138–151.
doi:10.1111/j.1540-5834.2003.06803012.x

Carlson, S. M., Moses, L. J., & Breton, C. (2002). How speciﬁc
is the relation between executive function and theory of mind?
Contributions of inhibitory control and working memory. Infant
and Child Development, 11, 73–92. doi:10.1002/icd.298

Caughy, M. O., Mills, B., Owen, M. T., & Hurst, J. R. (2013).
Emergent self-regulation skills among very young ethnic
minority children: A conﬁrmatory factor model. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 116, 839–855. doi:10.1016
/j.jecp.2013.07.017

Chang, L., Liu, H., Fung, K. Y., Wang, Y., Wen, Z., Li, H., &
Farver, J. M. (2007). The mediating and moderating effects of
teacher preference on the relations between students’ social
behaviors and peer acceptance. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 53,
603–630. doi:10.1353/mpq.2008.0006

Cillessen, A. H. N. (2009). Sociometric methods. In K. H. Rubin,
W. M. Bukowski, & B. Laursen (Eds.), Handbook of peer
interactions, relationships, and groups (pp. 82–99). New York,
NY: Guilford Press.

Coie, J. D., Dodge, K. A., & Coppotelli, H. (1982). Dimen-
sions and types of social status: A cross-age perspective.
Developmental Psychology,
doi:10.1037
/0012-1649.18.4.557

557–570.

18,

Crick, N. R., Casas, J. F., & Mosher, M. (1997). Relational and
overt aggression in preschool. Developmental Psychology, 33,
579–587. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.33.4.579

Crick, N. R., & Dodge, K. A. (1994). A review and reformulation
information-processing mechanisms in children’s
adjustment. Psychological Bulletin, 115, 74–101.

of social
social
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.115.1.74

Crick, N. R., & Grotpeter, J. K. (1995). Relational aggression,
gender, and social-psychological adjustment. Child Develop-
ment, 66, 710–722. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.1995.tb00900.x

Crick, N. R., Ostrov, J. M., Burr, J. E., Cullerton-Sen, C., Jansen-
Yeh, E., & Ralston, P. (2006). A longitudinal study of rela-
tional and physical aggression in preschool. Journal of Applied
doi:10.1016
Developmental
/j.appdev.2006.02.006

Psychology,

254–268.

27,

De Laet, S., Doumen, S., Vervoort, E., Colpin, H., Van
Leeuwen, K., Goossens, L., & Verschueren, K. (2014). Trans-
actional links between teacher–child relationship quality and
perceived versus sociometric popularity: A three-wave longitu-
dinal study. Child Development, 85, 1647–1662. doi:10.1111
/cdev.12216

Denham, S. A., Bassett, H. H., Sirotkin, Y. S., Brown, C., &
Morris, C. S. (2015). “No-o-o-o Peeking”: Preschoolers’ execu-
tive control, social competence, and classroom adjustment.
Journal of Research in Childhood Education, 29, 212–225.
doi:10.1080/02568543.2015.1008659

Denham, S. A., Warren-Khot, H. K., Bassett, H. H., Wyatt, T., &
Perna, A. (2012). Factor structure of self-regulation in pre-
schoolers: Testing models of a ﬁeld-based assessment for pre-
dicting early school readiness. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 111, 386–404. doi:10.1016/J.jecp.2011.10.002

Dennis, T. A., Brotman, L. M., Huang, K.-Y., & Gouley, K. K.
(2007). Effortful control, social competence, and adjustment
problems in children at risk for psychopathology. Journal of
Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 36, 442–454.
doi:10.1080/15374410701448513

Diamantopoulou, S., Rydell, A.-M., Thorell, L. B., &
Bohlin, G. (2007). Impact of executive functioning and
symptoms of attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder on
children’s peer relations and school performance. Devel-
opmental Neuropsychology, 32, 521–542. doi:10.1080/
87565640701360981

Diamond, A. (2013). Executive functions. Annual Review of Psy-
chology, 64, 135–168. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-113011-143750
Di Norcia, A., Pecora, G., Bombi, A. S., Baumgartner, E., &
Laghi, F. (2015). Hot and cool inhibitory control in Italian tod-
dlers: Associations with social competence and behavioral pro-
blems. Journal of Child and Family Studies, 24, 909–914.
doi:10.1007/s10826-014-9901-z

Domitrovich, C. E., Cortes, R. C., & Greenberg, M. T. (2007).
Improving young children’s social and emotional competence:
A randomized trial of the preschool “PATHS” curriculum.
Journal of Primary Prevention, 28, 67–91. doi:10.1007
/s10935-007-0081-0

Domitrovich, C. E., & Greenberg, M. T. (2000). The study of
implementation: Current ﬁndings from effective programs that
prevent mental disorders in school-aged children. Journal of
Educational and Psychological Consultation, 11, 193–221.
doi:10.1207/S1532768XJEPC1102_04

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

72

Self-regulation and social functioning

Dunn, M., & Dunn, L. M. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test-Revised: PPVT-R. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance
Service.

Dunn, M., Thériault-Whalen, C. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1993).
Echelle de vocabulaire en images Peabody: Adaptation fran-
çaise du Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test [Scale of vocabulary
in Peabody pictures: French adaptation of Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test]. Toronto, Canada: Psycan.

Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Nyman, M., Bernzweig, J., &
Pinuelas, A. (1994). The relations of emotionality and regula-
tion to children’s anger-related reactions. Child Development,
65, 109–128. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.1994.tb00738.x

Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., & Spinrad, T. L. (2006). Prosocial
development. In W. Damon, R. M. Lerner, & N. Eisenberg
(Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emo-
tional, and personality development (6th ed., pp. 646–718).
New York, NY: John Wiley.

Eisenberg, N., Hofer, C., & Vaughan, J. (2007). Effortful control
and its socioemotional consequences. In J. J. Gross (Ed.),
Handbook of emotion regulation (pp. 287–306). New York,
NY: Guilford Press.

Elliott, S. N., & Gresham, F. M. (1987). Children’s social skills:
Assessment and classiﬁcation practices. Journal of Counseling
and Development,
doi:10.1002/j.1556-6676
.1987.tb00808.x

96–99.

66,

Fahie, C. M., & Symons, D. K. (2003). Executive functioning and
theory of mind in children clinically referred for attention and
behavior problems. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 24, 51–73. doi:10.1016/S0193-3973(03)00024-8

Farmer, T. W., McAuliffe Lines, M., & Hamm, J. V. (2011).
Revealing the invisible hand: The role of teachers in children’s
peer experiences. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 32, 247–256. doi:10.1016/j.appdev.2011.04.006

Fink, E., Begeer, S., Hunt, C., & de Rosnay, M. (2014). False-
belief understanding and social preference over the ﬁrst 2 years
of school: A longitudinal study. Child Development, 85,
2389–2403. doi:10.1111/cdev.12302

Fuhs, M. W., & McNeil, N. M. (2013). ANS acuity and mathe-
matics ability in preschoolers from low-income homes: Contri-
butions of
inhibitory control. Developmental Science, 16,
136–148. doi:10.1111/desc.12013

Galen, B. R., & Underwood, M. K. (1997). A developmental
investigation of social aggression among children. Develop-
mental Psychology, 33, 589–600. doi:10.1037/0012-1649
.33.4.589

Gallagher, C. K., & Sylvester, P. R. (2009). Supporting peer rela-
tionships in early education. In O. A. Barbarin & B. H. Wasik
(Eds.), Handbook of child development and early education:
Research to practice (pp. 223–246). New York, NY: Guilford
Press.

Garon, N., Bryson, S. E., & Smith, I. M. (2008). Executive func-
tion in preschoolers: A review using an integrative framework.
doi:10.1037
Psychological
/0033-2909.134.1.31

Bulletin,

31–60.

134,

Gathercole, S. E., Pickering, S. J., Ambridge, B., & Wearing, H.
(2004). The structure of working memory from 4 to 15 years
of age. Developmental Psychology, 40, 177–190. doi:10.1037
/0012-1649.40.2.177

Gestsdottir, S., von Suchodoletz, A., Wanless, S. B., Hubert, B.,
Guimard, P., Birgisdottir, F., … McClelland, M. (2014). Early

behavioral self-regulation, academic achievement, and gender:
Longitudinal ﬁndings from France, Germany, and Iceland.
Applied Developmental Science, 18, 90–109. doi:10.1080
/10888691.2014.894870

Graham, S., Bellmore, A. D., & Mize, J. (2006). Peer victimiza-
tion, aggression, and their co-occurrence in middle school:
Pathways to adjustment problems. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 34, 349–364. doi:10.1007/s10802-006-9030-2

Gresham, F. M. (2001). Assessment of social skills in children
and adolescents. In J. J. W. Andrews, D. H. Saklofske, &
H. L. Janzen (Eds.), Handbook of psychoeducational assess-
ment: Ability,
children
(pp. 325–355). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. doi:10.1016
/B978-012058570-0/50013-6

achievement,

behavior

and

in

Hay, D. F., Castle,

J., Davies, L., Demetriou, H., &
Stimson, C. A. (1999). Prosocial action in very early childhood.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 40, 905–916.
doi:10.1111/1469-7610.00508

Hay, D. F., Payne, A., & Chadwick, A. (2004). Peer relations in
childhood. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 45,
84–108. doi:10.1046/j.0021-9630.2003.00308.x

Hodges, E. V. E., Malone, M. J., & Perry, D. G. (1997). Individ-
ual risk and social risk as interacting determinants of victimiza-
tion in the peer group. Developmental Psychology, 33,
1032–1039. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.33.6.1032

Hodges, E. V. E., & Perry, D. G. (1999). Personal and interper-
sonal antecedents and consequences of victimization by peers.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 677–685.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.76.4.677

Holmes, C. J., Kim-Spoon, J., & Deater-Deckard, K. (2016).
Linking executive function and peer problems from early child-
hood through middle adolescence. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 44, 31–42. doi:10.1007/s10802-015-0044-5

Hubert, B., Guimard, P., Florin, A., & Tracy, A. (2015). Indirect
and direct relationships between self-regulation and academic
achievement during the nursery/elementary school transition of
French students. Early Education and Development, 26,
685–707. doi:10.1080/10409289.2015.1037624

Hughes, C., Dunn, J., & White, A. (1998). Trick or treat?: Uneven
understanding of mind and emotion and executive dysfunction
in “hard-to-manage” preschoolers. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 39, 981–994. doi:10.1111/1469-7610.00401

Hughes, C., & Ensor, R. (2007a). Executive function and theory
of mind: Predictive relations from ages 2 to 4. Developmental
Psychology, 43, 1447–1459. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.43.6.1447
Hughes, C., & Ensor, R. (2007b). Positive and protective: Effects
of early theory of mind on problem behaviors in at-risk pre-
schoolers. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 48,
1025–1032. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2007.01806.x

(2011).

Hughes, C., & Ensor, R.

Individual differences in
growth in executive function across the transition to school
predict externalizing and internalizing behaviors and self-
perceived academic success at 6 years of age. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 108, 663–676. doi:10.1016
/j.jecp.2010.06.005

Hughes, C., White, A., Sharpen, J., & Dunn, J. (2000). Antisocial,
angry, and unsympathetic: “Hard-to-manage” preschoolers’
peer problems and possible cognitive inﬂuences. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 41, 169–179. doi:10.1111
/1469-7610.00558

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

PsyCh Journal

73

Hughes, J. N., Cavell, T. A., & Willson, V. (2001). Further sup-
port for the developmental signiﬁcance of the quality of the
teacher–student relationship. Journal of School Psychology, 39,
289–302. doi:10.1016/S0022-4405(01)00074-7

acceptance

and rejection in childhood.

Hymel, S., Vaillancourt, T., McDougall, P., & Renshaw, P. D.
(2002). Peer
In
P. K. Smith & G. H. Hart (Eds.), Blackwell handbook of child-
hood social development (pp. 265–284). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Jiang, X. L., & Cillessen, A. H. (2005). Stability of continuous
measures of sociometric status: A meta-analysis. Developmen-
tal Review, 25, 1–25. doi:10.1016/j.dr.2004.08.008

Kim, S., Nordling,

Jones, L. B., Rothbart, M. K., & Posner, M. I. (2003). Develop-
ment of executive attention in preschool children. Developmen-
tal Science, 6, 498–504. doi:10.1111/1467-7687.00307
J. E., Boldt, L.

J., &
Kochanska, G. (2013). Effortful control in “hot” and “cool”
tasks differentially predicts children’s behavior problems and
academic performance. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology,
41, 43–56. doi:10.1007/s10802-012-9661-4

J. K., Yoon,

Kochanska, G., Coy, K. C., & Murray, K. T. (2001). The develop-
ment of self-regulation in the ﬁrst four years of life. Child
Development, 72, 109–111. doi:10.1111/1467-8624.00336

Kochenderfer, B. J., & Ladd, G. W. (1996). Peer victimization:
Cause or consequence of school maladjustment? Child Devel-
opment,
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.1996
.tb01797.x

1305–1317.

67,

Ladd, G. W., & Proﬁlet, S. M. (1996). The Child Behavior Scale:
A teacher-report measure of young children’s aggressive, with-
drawn, and prosocial behaviors. Developmental Psychology, 32,
1008–1024. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.32.6.1008

Ladd, G. W., & Troop-Gordon, W. (2003). The role of chronic
peer difﬁculties in the development of children’s psychological
adjustment problems. Child Development, 74, 1344–1367.
doi:10.1111/1467-8624.00611

Lan, X., Legare, C. H., Ponitz, C. C., Li, S., & Morrison, F. J.
(2011). Investigating the links between the subcomponents of
executive function and academic achievement: A cross-cultural
analysis of Chinese and American preschoolers. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 108, 677–692. doi:10.1016
/j.jecp.2010.11.001

Lapointe, P., Noêl, J.-M., & Strayer, F. F. (1993). La réputation
sociale de l’enfant en milieu scolaire. Canadian Journal of
Behavioural Science/Revue canadienne des sciences du com-
portement, 25, 522–540. doi:10.1037/h0078880

Lemerise, E. A., & Arsenio, W. F. (2000). An integrated model
of emotion processes and cognition in social information pro-
cessing. Child Development, 71, 107–118. doi:10.1111
/1467-8624.00124

Masten, A. S., Herbers, J. E., Desjardins, C. D., Cutuli, J. J.,
McCormick, C. M., Sapienza, J. K., … Zelazo, P. D. (2012).
Executive function skills and school success in young children
experiencing
41,
375–384. doi:10.3102/0013189X12459883

homelessness. Educational Researcher,

Matthews, J. S., Ponitz, C. C., & Morrison, F. J. (2009). Early
gender differences in self-regulation and academic achieve-
ment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 101, 689–704.
doi:10.1037/a0014240

McClelland, M. M., Cameron, C. E., Connor, C. M., Farris, C. L.,
Jewkes, A. M., & Morrison, F. J. (2007). Links between

behavioral regulation and preschoolers’ literacy, vocabulary,
and math skills. Developmental Psychology, 43, 947–959.
doi:10.1037/0012-1649.43.4.947

McClelland, M. M., Cameron, C. E., Duncan, R., Bowles, R. P.,
Acock, A. C., Miao, A., & Pratt, M. E. (2014). Predictors of
early growth in academic achievement: The head-toes-knees-
shoulders task. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 599. doi:10.3389
/fpsyg.2014.00599

McClelland, M. M., Cameron Ponitz, C., Messersmith, E. E., &
Tominey, S. (2010). Self-regulation: The integration of cogni-
tion and emotion. In R. M. Lerner & W. F. Overton (Eds.),
Handbook of life-span human development: Vol. 1. Cognition,
biology, and methods (pp. 509–553). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley
and Sons.

(pp.

McClelland, M. M., & Scalzo, S. (2006). Social skills deﬁcits. In
M. Hersen (Ed.), Clinician’s handbook of child behavioral
313–335). San Diego, CA: Elsevier.
assessment
doi:10.1016/B978-012343014-4/50014-9

Merrell, K. W. (2001). Assessment of children’s social skills:
Recent developments, best practices, and new directions.
Exceptionality, 9, 3–18. doi:10.1080/09362835.2001.9666988

Mofﬁtt, T. E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N.,
Hancox, R. J., Harrington, H., … Caspi, A. (2011). A gradient
of childhood self-control predicts health, wealth, and public
safety. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 108, 2693–2698. doi:10.1073
/pnas.1010076108

Mostow, A. J., Izard, C. E., Fine, S., & Trentacosta, C. J. (2002).
Modeling emotional, cognitive, and behavioral predictors of
1775–1787.
peer
doi:10.1111/1467-8624.00505

acceptance. Child Development,

Nangle, D. W., & Erdley, C. A. (2001). Editor’s notes. New Direc-
for Child and Adolescent Development, 91, 1–4.

73,

tions
doi:10.1002/cd.2

Nigg, J. T., Quamma, J. P., Greenberg, M. T., & Kusche, C. A.
(1999). A two-year longitudinal study of neuropsychological
and cognitive performance in relation to behavioral problems
and competencies in elementary school children. Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology,
doi:10.1023
/A:1022614407893

51–63.

27,

Nishina, A., Juvonen, J., & Witkow, M. R. (2005). Sticks and
stones may break my bones, but names will make me feel sick:
The psychosocial, somatic, and scholastic consequences of peer
harassment. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychol-
ogy, 34, 37–48. doi:10.1207/s15374424jccp3401_4

Olson, S. L., & Lifgren, K. (1998). Concurrent and longitudi-
nal correlates of preschool peer sociometrics: Comparing
rating scale and nomination measures. Journal of Applied
doi:10.1016
Developmental
/0193-3973(88)90009-3

Psychology,

409–420.

9,

Olson, S. L., Lopez-Duran, N., Lunkenheimer, E. S.,
Chang, H., & Sameroff, A. J. (2011). Individual differences in
the development of early peer aggression: Integrating contribu-
tions of self-regulation, theory of mind, and parenting. Devel-
opment and Psychopathology, 23, 253–266. doi:10.1017
/S0954579410000775

Ostrov, J. M. (2010). Prospective associations between peer vic-
timization and aggression. Child Development, 81, 1670–1677.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2010.01501.x

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

74

Self-regulation and social functioning

Paulus, M., & Moore, C. (2012). Producing and understanding
prosocial actions in early childhood. Advances in Child Devel-
doi:10.1016
opment
/B978-0-12-394388-0.00008-3

271–305.

Behavior,

and

42,

Pellegrini, A. D., Bartini, M., & Brooks, F. (1999). School bul-
lies, victims, and aggressive victims: Factors relating to group
afﬁliation and victimization in early adolescence. Journal of
doi:10.1037
Educational
/0022-0663.91.2.216

Psychology,

216–224.

Pepler, D. J., & Craig, W. M. (1998). Assessing children’s peer
relationships. Child Psychology and Psychiatry Review, 3,
176–182.

91,

Perren, S., & Alsaker, F. D. (2006). Social behavior and peer rela-
tionships of victims, bully-victims, and bullies in kindergarten.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47, 45–57.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2005.01445.x

Ponitz, C. C., McClelland, M. M., Matthews,

J. S., &
Morrison, F. J. (2009). A structured observation of behavioral
self-regulation and its contribution to kindergarten outcomes.
doi:10.1037
Developmental
/a0015365

Psychology,

605–619.

45,

trustworthiness, inhibitory control, and preschool adjustment.
288–298.
Early Childhood
doi:10.1016/j.ecresq.2007.04.003

Research Quarterly,

23,

Rubin, K. H., Bukowski, W., & Parker, J. (2006). Peer interactions,
relationships, and groups. In W. Damon, R. M. Lerner, &
N. Eisenberg (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3.
(6th ed.,
Social, emotional, and personality development
pp. 571–645). New York, NY: John Wiley.

Rudasill, K. M., & Rimm-Kaufman, S. E. (2009). Teacher–child
relationship quality: The roles of child temperament and
teacher–child interactions. Early Childhood Research Quar-
terly, 24, 107–120. doi:10.1016/j.ecresq.2008.12.003

Sabbagh, M. A., Xu, F., Carlson, S. M., Moses, L. J., & Lee, K.
(2006). The development of executive functioning and theory
of mind: A comparison of Chinese and U.S. preschoolers.
Psychological Science, 17, 74–81. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.
2005.01667.x

Sanson, A., Hemphill, S. A., & Smart, D. (2004). Connections
between temperament and social development: A review.
doi:10.1046
Social
/j.1467-9507.2004.00261.x

Development,

142–170.

13,

Raaijmakers, M. A.

J., Smidts, D. P., Sergeant,

J. A.,
Maassen, G. H., Posthumus, J. A., van Engeland, H., &
Matthys, W. (2008). Executive functions in preschool children
with aggressive behavior: Impairments in inhibitory control.
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 36, 1097–1107.
doi:10.1007/s10802-008-9235-7

Raven, J. C. (1998). PM 47 [Color Progressive Matrices]. Paris,

France: Edition du Centre de Psychologie Appliquée.

Razza, R. A., & Blair, C. (2009). Associations among false-belief
understanding, executive function, and social competence: A
longitudinal analysis. Journal of Applied Developmental Psy-
chology, 30, 332–343. doi:10.1016/j.appdev.2008.12.020

Rhoades, B. L., Greenberg, M. T., & Domitrovich, C. E. (2009).
The contribution of inhibitory control to preschoolers’ social–
emotional competence. Journal of Applied Developmental Psy-
chology, 30, 310–320. doi:10.1016/j.appdev.2008.12.012

Riggs, N. R., Blair, C. B., & Greenberg, M. T. (2003). Concurrent
and 2-year longitudinal relations between executive function
and the behavior of 1st and 2nd grade children. Child Neuro-
psychology, 9, 267–276. doi:10.1076/chin.9.4.267.23513

Rogosch, F. A., & Newcomb, A. F. (1989). Children’s perceptions
of peer reputations and their social reputations among peers.
Child Development, 60, 597–610. doi:10.2307/1130726

Rose, A. J., & Smith, R. L. (2009). Sex differences in peer rela-
tionships. In K. H. Rubin, W. M. Bukowski, & B. Laursen
(Eds.), Handbook of peer interactions, relationships, and
groups (pp. 379–393). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Rose-Krasnor, L., & Denham, S. (2009). Socio-emotional compe-
tence in early childhood. In K. H. Rubin, W. Bukowski, &
B. Laursen (Eds.), Handbook of peer interactions, relation-
ships, and groups (pp. 162–179). New York, NY: Guilford
Press.

Roskam, I., Stievenart, M., Meunier, J.-C., & Noël, M.-P. (2014).
The development of children’s inhibition: Does parenting mat-
ter? Journal of Experimental Psychology, 122, 166–182.
doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2014.01.003

Rotenberg, K. J., Michalik, N., Eisenberg, N., & Betts, L. R.
(2008). The relations among young children’s peer-reported

Schmitt, M. B., Pentimonti, J. M., & Justice, L. M. (2012).
Teacher–child relationships, behavior regulation, and language
gain among at-risk preschoolers. Journal of School Psychology,
50, 681–699. doi:10.1016/j.jsp.2012.04.003

Smith, M. (2001). Social and emotional competencies: Contribu-
tions to young African-American children’s peer acceptance.
Early Education and Development, 12, 49–72. doi:10.1207
/s15566935eed1201_4

Stenseng, F., Belsky, J., Skalicka, V., & Wichstrøm, L. (2014).
Preschool social exclusion, aggression, and cooperation: A lon-
gitudinal evaluation of
the need-to-belong and the social-
reconnection hypotheses. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 40, 1637–1647. doi:10.1177/0146167214554591

Ursache, A., Blair, C., & Raver, C. C. (2012). The promotion of
self-regulation as a means of enhancing school readiness and
early achievement in children at risk for school failure. Child
doi:10.1111
Development
/j.1750-8606.2011.00209.x

Perspectives,

122–128.

6,

Vaillancourt, T., Brendgen, M., Boivin, M., & Tremblay, R. E.
(2003). A longitudinal conﬁrmatory factor analysis of indirect
and physical aggression: Evidence of two factors over time?
doi:10.1046
Child
/j.1467-8624.2003.00628.x

1628–1638.

Development,

74,

von Suchodoletz, A., & Gunzenhauser, C. (2013). Behavior regu-
lation and early math and vocabulary knowledge in German
preschool children. Early Education and Development, 24,
310–331. doi:10.1080/10409289.2012.693428

Wechsler, D. (2005). Echelle d’intelligence de Wechsler pour
enfants: WISC-IV [Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children]
(4th ed.). Paris, France: ECPA, les Editions du Centre de Psy-
chologie Appliquée.

White, K. J., & Jones, K. (2000). Effects of teacher feedback on
the reputations and peer perceptions of children with behavior
problems. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 76,
302–326. doi:10.1006/jecp.1999.2552

Willoughby, M. T., Blair, C. B., Wirth, R. J., & Greenberg, M.
(2012). The measurement of executive function at age 5: Psy-
chometric properties and relationship to academic achievement.
Psychological Assessment, 24, 226–239. doi:10.1037/a0025361

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

PsyCh Journal

75

Yeates, K. O., Bigler, E. D., Dennis, M., Gerhardt, C. A.,
Rubin, K. H., Stancin, T., … Vannatta, K. (2007). Social out-
comes in childhood brain disorder: A heuristic integration of
social neuroscience and developmental psychology. Psychological
Bulletin, 133, 535–556. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.133.3.535

Yeates, K. O., Schultz, L. H., & Selman, R. L. (1991). The devel-
opment of interpersonal negotiation strategies in thought and

action: A social-cognitive link to behavioral adjustment and
social status. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 37, 369–405.

Zhou, Q., Chen, S. H., & Main, A. (2012). Commonalities and
differences in the research on children’s effortful control and
executive function: A call for an integrated model of self-regu-
112–121.
lation. Child Development Perspectives,
doi:10.1111/j.1750-8606.2011.00176.x

6,

© 2017 The Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd

