Developmental  Psychology
1985,  Vol. 21, No.  1,46-55

In the  public domain.
O012-I649/85/SO0.7J

Naturalistic and Structured  Assessments of Prosocial Behavior

in  Preschool Children: The Influence  of Empathy  and

Perspective Taking

Laboratory  of Developmental  Psychology,  National  Institute  of  Mental  Health

Ronald J.  Iannotti

The  interrelationship  of  different  categories  of  prosocial  behavior,  different
assessment  procedures,  and  the  role  of  empathy  and  perspective  taking  as
mediators of different  categories of prosocial behavior are examined  in the present
study.  Prosocial  behavior  in  52  preschool  children  was  assessed  using  three
different  approaches: (a) naturalistic observation of prosocial events, (b) structured
measures  of  perspective  taking,  empathy,  and  two  types  of  prosocial  behaviors,
and  (c) teacher  ratings  of  prosocial  behaviors  under  different  eliciting  situations.
Different  categories  of  prosocial  behavior  within  the  first  two  settings  were
relatively  independent.  Teacher  ratings  were  internally  consistent  but  generally
unrelated  to  the  other  measures.  The  structured  measure  of  prosocial  behavior
that  had  a  peer  as  the recipient  was the best  predictor  of the  equivalent  observed
behavior.  Inconsistencies in  previous  research  investigating the  empathy-altruism
relationship  may  reflect  differences  in  assessment  procedures,  because  significant
relationships  between  different  forms  of  empathy  and  prosocial  behavior  were
dependent  on  the  operational  definitions  of  these  processes.  Preschool  children
demonstrated  a  sensitivity  to  the  needs  and  feelings  of  their  peers. Although  this
capacity  was  not  tapped  by  traditional  measures  of  perspective  taking,  it  may
have mediated  prosocial  behavior  in  the  natural  setting.

Most  studies  of prosocial  behavior  rely  on
a  single  measure  of  a  particular  form  in  an
atypical  context.  Generalizations  of  these
findings  and  comparisons  between  studies
have  therefore  been  very  difficult.  Studies
that  report  the relationship  between  different
measures of prosocial behavior indicate a low
but  statistically  significant  correlation  (e.g.,
Eisenberg-Berg  &  Hand,  1979;  Hay,  1979;
Yarrow  &  Waxier,  1976).  Both  Rushton
(1976)  and  Underwood  and  Moore  (1982b)
suggest  that  a  correlation  of  .30  is  most

This  research  was conducted  while  the  author  was  at
Marietta  College, Marietta,  Ohio.  Portions of this  article
were presented at the meeting of the Society for  Research
in  Child  Development,  Boston,  April  1981.

The  author  would  like  to  thank  Terri  Bates  for  her
assistance in gathering the data for this study, the preschool
teachers, Judy  Stoof,  Roberta  Smith,  and  Nancy  Carter,
for their patience and cooperation, and  Mark Curamings,
Dale Hay, and  Carolyn  Zahn-Waxier for suggestions with
regard  to an  earlier draft  of this  manuscript.

Requests  for  reprints  should  be  sent  to  Ronald  J.
Iannotti,  Laboratory  of  Developmental  Psychology,
Building  15K,  National  Institute  of  Mental  Health,  Be-
thesda,  Maryland  20205.

46

representative  of  the  findings.  Tonick,  Gel-
fand, Hartmann, Cromer, and Millsapp (1979)
and  Eisenberg-Berg and  Lennon  (1980) dem-
onstrated  the  importance  of  antecedents  in
the  analysis  of  consistency  and  the  concep-
tualization  of  motivational  processes  of  pro-
social behavior. In the present study prosocial
behaviors  and  their  antecedents  are  observed
in  a  naturalistic  setting,  rated  by  teachers,
and  measured  with  structured  tasks.  It  is
hypothesized  that prosocial behaviors assessed
in  different  settings  are  related  when  similar
motivational  processes  are  implicated.  For
example, measures should correlate when  the
same  category  of  behavior  is  assessed  with
similar  recipients, similar  antecedents,  or  in-
volving similar  social-cognitive  processes.

The  importance  of  the  procedures  for  as-
sessing  empathy  and  the  way  in  which  em-
pathy is conceptualized  has been  documented
as well (Iannotti,  1975b,  1978;Shantz,  1975).
For example, the  relationship  between  sharing
and  empathy  has  been  reported  as  positive
(Buckley,  Siegel,  &  Ness,  1979)  or  negative
(Iannotti,  1978) depending  on  how  empathy
is  assessed.  Measures  of  empathy  may  be

PROSOCIAL  BEHAVIOR

47

differentiated  on  the  basis  of  whether  they
require a cognitive or emotional response and
whether  this  response  is  to  situational  cues
or  affective  cues  (Iannotti,  1975a).  Various
forms  of  empathy  have  been  implicated  in
several  theoretical  approaches  to  prosocial
behavior  (Hoffman,  1975;  Iannotti,  1975b;
Mussen  &  Eisenberg-Berg,  1977).  There  is
strong support for the argument that  different
forms of empathy mediate certain  categories
of prosocial behavior (Eisenberg-Berg & Len-
non,  1980;  Miller,  1979;  Sawin,  1979).  A
measure  of  empathy  that  differentiates  be-
tween  situational  and  affective  cues  and  as-
sesses both affective  understanding and emo-
tional responsiveness (Iannotti,  1978) is used
in the present  study to examine the possible
relationships between  different  forms  of em-
pathy  and  different  patterns  of prosocial be-
havior.

The  corresponding  argument  can  be con-
structed for the influence of perspective-taking
processes  on  prosocial  behavior.  Perspec-
tive taking  involves  understanding  another's
thoughts  and  motives  as  well  as  feelings;
unlike  some  forms  of  empathy,  it  does  not
require  an  emotional  response.  Measures of
social perspective taking have been positively
correlated  with  helping and  sharing, and  at-
tempts  to  enhance  perspective-taking  skills
have  produced  increased  prosocial  behavior
(Ahammer  & Murray,  1979; Buckley  et al.,
1979; Chandler,  1973; Iannotti,  1978; Rubin
&  Schneider,  1973; Staub,  1971).  However,
there  is  some  contradictory  evidence  as  to
whether  the  relationship  is consistent  across
all ages and across all measures of perspective
taking  (Eisenberg-Berg  &  Lennon,  1980;
Johnson,  1975;  Rushton  &  Wiener,  1975;
Zahn-Waxier, Radke-Yarrow, & Brady-Smith,
1977).  The  mediational  role  of  perspective-
taking  processes  may  also  be  dependent  on
the contextual  and  motivational  elements of
the  social 
interchange.  Perspective-taking
measures that assess perceptual processes, for
example,  spatial  perspective  taking,  or  that
require understanding of an unfamiliar  adult
or hypothetical  peer are  less likely to  reflect
the interdependencies  between  cognitive  and
social  domains  in  young  children  than  are
measures  that  tap  social  inferences  about
familiar  peers. A battery  of assessment  pro-
cedures that  indicate social and affective  un-

derstanding of familiar  peers and adults pro-
vides a  more  reasonable  basis for  evaluating
interrelationships  and  for  analyzing  the  role
of  particular  forms  of  perspective  taking  as
mediators of particular  patterns  of prosocial
behavior. In the present study, three perspec-
tive-taking measures assess social perspective
taking in relation to familiar peers and adults.
Another persistent problem  in the investi-
gation  of  the  role  of  perspective  taking  in
prosocial behavior is the difficulty  of measur-
ing  social-cognitive  processes  in  a  natural
setting. One  solution  is to  identify  naturally
occurring patterns of behavior that appear to
require  perspective-taking  skills.  Children
who, without  an explicit  request,  respond  to
the  needs  of  others  may  be  using  their  per-
spective-taking  skills  to  infer  the  needs  of
others. Spontaneous prosocial  acts are there-
fore examined  in  more detail than  are  other
antecedent categories.

Method

Subjects

The  52  children  (21  girls  and  31  boys)  in  this  study
attended  one  of  two  classes  (26  children  each)  of  a
preschool  in  a  small  midwestern  city.  The  average  age
was  59  months,  with  a  range  of  52  to  66  months.  The
children  were  from  predominately  white,  middle-class
homes.

Procedure

The  order,  the  time  of  day,  and  the  month  of  each
observation  was  randomized  for  each  child.  Within  this
schedule,  each  child  was to  be  observed  over  a  5-month
period  for  three  25-min  sessions.  Interrupted  sessions
were  rescheduled  so  the  total  observation  time  actually
averaged  79  min  per  child.  During  the  last  month  of
observation,  laboratory  measures  of  perspective  taking,
prosocial  behavior,  and  empathy  were administered,  and
the three teachers of the class rated the children's prosocial
behaviors.

Observational Categories

Using  an  event-sampling  procedure,  each  trained  ob-
server  (male  or  female)  recorded  four  categories  of  pro-
social  behavior:  sharing,  cooperation,  helping,  and  com-
forting.  In  addition  to  coding the  prosocial  behavior  the
observers indicated the antecedents of the act.1  Reliability

1 All antecedents were placed into an existing category,
i.e., normal  conversational,  aggressive, or prosocial  inter-
actions were evaluated for evidence of verbal or nonverbal
behaviors  which  conformed  to  an  existing  category.

48

RONALD  J.  IANNOTTI

between  observers  was  established  with  both  observers
coding for  300 min. Reliability was computed by dividing
the  number  of  agreements  by  agreements  plus  disagree-
ments. The  reliability  across  all categories  was  86%. For
each  child,  the  number  of  times  a  particular  behavior
occurred  was divided by the number of minutes the child
was observed  to  provide a  rate  of occurrence  for  each  of
the  categories.  These  rates  were  then  used  for  all  data
analyses.  The  observational  categories  (with  reliabilities
as percentage of agreements in parentheses) are described
below.

Antecedents.  Requests  (78) occurred  when the poten-
tial recipient of the prosocial act used verbal or nonverbal
means to  indicate  a desire  for  the behavior,  for  example,
asking  for  assistance  or  pointing  to  an  object.  Directed
by  child  (100)  was  defined  as  a  child  other  than  the
recipient  directing  or  requesting  that  the  child  exhibit  a
prosocial  behavior.  Directed  by  teacher  (90)  entailed  a
teacher  directing  or  requesting  that  the  child  exhibit  a
prosocial  behavior.  For  spontaneous  (90),  there  was  no
explicit  verbal  or  nonverbal  request.

Prosocial  behaviors.  Sharing  (86)  included  giving  or
verbally  offering  an  object  that  was  previously  in  the
child's  possession.  Cooperating  (90)  differed  from  the
other  prosocial categories in that  both  children  benefited
from  their  involvement,  whereas the  other  child  was the
major  beneficiary  in  sharing,  helping,  or comforting.  For
cooperation, at least two children  were mutually  involved
in  a  task  such  as  clean-up  or  an  activity  facilitated  by
cooperation. Helping (71) consisted  of one child  assisting
another  child  by  providing  information,  requesting  aid
for  the  child  from  the  teacher  or  another  child,  or  by
doing  something  that  facilitates  the  ongoing  activity  of
the  other  child.  Comforting2  was  only  coded  when  the
recipient  showed  distress  prior  to  the  act.  Comforting
included  verbal or physical  consolation, such as sympathy,
affection,  giving  an  object  to  the  distressed  other,  or
getting an  adult  to attend  to the distressed  other.  Refusal
(83)  was  defined  as  not  acting  prosocially  when  it  was
explicitly  requested.

Laboratory  Measures

During  the  last  4  weeks  of  observation  each  child,  in
a  random  order,  was  taken  by  a  familiar  adult,  one  of
the observers,3 to a room  in the preschool building where
prosocial  behavior, perspective taking, and  empathy  were
assessed. The session lasted approximately  IS min. There
were three measures of perspective taking: a hiding game,
a  choice  game,  and  a  nickel-dime  game;  two  measures
of  prosocial  behavior,  helping  and  sharing;  and  a  single
measure  of  empathy.  The  three  perspective-taking  tasks
were selected  because they were judged  to be  appropriate
to this age group and assessed social rather than  perceptual
perspective  taking  (Kurdek,  1979).  The  two  prosocial
measures  were  designed  to  assess  helping  and  sharing
with  real  people  who  were  familiar  to  the  child.  The
empathy  measure  was  selected  because  several  forms  of
empathic  behavior  of  theoretical  interest  were  assessed
with  a  nonverbal  response  suitable  for  this  age  group.
The  measures  were as  follows:

Helping.  The  experimenter  "accidentally"  knocked  a
container  of  pencils  onto  the  floor.  He  or  she  said,
"Oops,"  continued  writing  for  20  s,  and  then  retrieved
the  pencils for  30 s. The child  who spontaneously  helped

during  the  initial  20  s  received  a  score  of  2.  The  child
who  helped  when  the  experimenter  was  collecting  the
pencils received  a  score of  1.

Penny  Hiding.  Devries's (1970)  Penny  Hiding  Game
was administered  to the children to assess social perspec-
tive taking in  an  interactive game. In the game, the  child
is shown  the  experimenter's  closed  hands and  instructed
to  guess  the  location  of  a  penny,  which,  in  a  concealed
fashion,  has been  hidden  in  one  hand.  Unknown  to  the
child,  the  location  of  the  penny  is controlled  to  provide
the same experience of success and  failure  for all children;
there  is  a  penny  in  both  hands  for  the  first  three
presentations, both  hands are empty  for the second  three
presentations,  and  both  hands  contain  a  penny  in  the
seventh  trial.  On  the  following  six  trials,  the  child  is
asked  to  hide  a  single  penny  in  his  or  her  hands  while
the  experimenter  guesses its  location.

The  scoring  of  this  task  is  based  on  the  10-point
system  used  by  Devries;  a  low  score  reflects  a  lack  of
awareness that an individual possesses private  information,
and  a  high  score  reflects  the  use  of  interactive  strategies
that  take  into  account  the other's  perspective.

Gift  Choice.  The  Gift  Choice  Task  was developed  by
Flavell  (TASK  IIIB,  1968). The  child  is shown  a  "store"
with  stockings, neckties, toy trucks, dolls, and books and
asked to select a gift  for his or her father,  mother,  teacher,
opposite-sexed  sibling  or  friend,  and  himself  or  herself.
The scoring system, which  is described  by Flavell, places
a  child  in  one  of  four  levels depending  on  whether  he  or
she  egocentrically  selects  a  role-inappropriate  gift  for  an
adult  (1)  or  whether  the  child  demonstrates  perspective
taking by  selecting gifts  that  are  role  appropriate  for  the
recipient  (4).

Nickel-Dime  Game.  This  task,  also  described  by
Flavell,  was  included  to  assess  more  advanced  levels  of
perspective  taking.  The  child  is  shown  a  box  containing
5  pennies  with  a  " 5" written  on  the  outside,  and  a  box
containing  10  pennies  with  a  "10"  on  the  outside.  The
child  is  told  that  another  child  is  going  to  guess  which
box has money  in it. The child  must  trick  the other child
by  removing the  money  from  one  of the boxes. Next  the
child  is  asked  to  choose  between  the  5-  and  10-cent
boxes  left  by  "the  child  before  you"  who  is  "trying  to
trick  you."  Based  on  the  child's  reasons  for  selecting  a
particular  box,  perspective-taking  processes  rather  than
the  actual  solutions  to  the  problems  are  evaluated  with
a 6-point  classification  of perspective taking. A child  who
cannot  give any  reasons or  motives for  behaviors receives
the  lowest  score;  a  child  who  can  reflect  on  others'
motives  and  reasons  in  their  decision  receives  a  higher
score (Selman  & Byrne,  1974).

Empathy.  The  measure  of  empathy  is  described  by
Iannotti  (1978).  The  child  was  told  a  story  about  a
picture and  asked to  indicate  his or her own  feelings  and
the  feelings  of  the  character  in  the  story  by  pointing  to
one  of  eight  drawings  of  faces.  The  faces  were  verbally
labeled  as happy,  sad,  afraid,  or  angry.  The  K-R  20  was
used  to  compute  reliabilities  (indicated  in  parentheses)

2 Comforting  did  not occur during the reliability coding

periods.

3 Observers would occasionally assist the teachers when
not  observing  and  thus  were  familiar  socially  as  well  as
in  appearance.

PROSOCIAL  BEHAVIOR

49

for  each  form  of  empathy.  Most  traditional  measures  of
empathy  (e.g.,  Borke,  1971;  Feshbach  &  Roe,  1968)
require  that  the  child  identify  the  other's  emotions  and
his or her own emotions when the character is responding
appropriately  to the situation,  for example, a happy child
at  a  birthday  party.  In  8  of  the  16  empathy  items  the
emotional expression of the character was consistent  with
the  situation.  The  reliability  of  emotional  matching,
indicating that  one's own emotions were identical to  that
of  the  character,  was  acceptable  (.76),  whereas  the  reli-
ability of identifying  the other's emotions in  the  standard
situation  was not  (.52).

In  8  of  the  16  pictures  the  emotional  expression  of
the  character  was  incongruent  with  the  situation,  for
example,  a  sad  child  at  a  birthday  party.  Children
indicated  separately  the  character's  and  their  own  emo-
tions.  Each  of  these  responses  were  scored  twice  to
determine  if  the  child  matched  the  situational  cues
(happy  in  the  example  above)  or  the  affective  cues  (sad).
It  was  also  possible  to  match  neither  set  of  cues.  Thus
there  were  four  categories  for  scoring:  Responses  that
matched  the  situational  cues  included  labeling  other's
emotions  (situational  role taking,  .71) and  labeling  one's
own  emotions  (.28);  responses  could  also  indicate  that
the  character's  emotions  (emotional  role  taking,  .72)  or
the  child's  emotions  (.45)  matched  the  emotional  cues
(Iannotti,  1975a). The  reliabilities  for  labeling  one's  own
emotions  in  response  to  either  situational  or  affective
cues  were  unacceptably  low.  The  three  forms  with  low
reliabilites  are  not  discussed  further.

Sharing.  Each  child  was  given  a  choice  of  either  M
& Ms or raisins. Eleven of the preferred  items were given
to  the  children  while  the  experimenter  indicated  that
they  "could  leave  some  for 
(their  best  friend)."
Several  options  were  presented  (eating  all,  giving  some,
and  giving  all  of  the  candy  or  raisins).  The  child  was
then  left  alone  to  put  the  candy  in  an  envelope  marked
with  the  name  of  his  or  her  best  friend.  Friends,  as
determined  by  earlier  questioning  and  observing  of  the
child,  were  used  as  recipients  to  provide  a  context  as
similar  as possible  to that  found  in  the  natural  setting in
which  prosocial  behaviors are  frequently  directed  toward
friends  or  familiar  peers. The  number  of  candies  shared
with  the  friend  was the  sharing  score.

Teacher ratings.  During the fifth month of the  project,
the  two  teachers  in  each  of  the  preschool  classes jointly
rated  the  children's  prosocial  behaviors  using  a  7-point
scale.  The  form  included  39  items  indicating  examples
of  sharing,  cooperating,  helping,  and  comforting,  for
example,  "Spontaneously  offers  consolation  to  another
child  if  the  other  child  is  hurt  or  sad."  The  eliciting
situation  for  behaviors,  including  explicit  request  from
the  teacher,  explicit  request  by  another  child,  or  sponta-
neous behavior without a request, was also varied. Teach-
ers'  ratings  for  the  items  relating  to  each  of  the  four
categories  of  prosocial  behavior  were  summed,  and  four
percentage  scores  were  calculated  for  each  child  using  a
perfect  rating as the  denominator.

Results

The  means  and  standard  deviations  for
boys and  girls and  the percentage  of  children
scoring  greater  than  zero  for  both  sexes  are

shown  in  Table  1.  A  total  of  421  naturally
occurring  prosocial  events  were  observed.
The  most  frequent  prosocial  behavior  was
cooperative  behavior.4  The  rates  of  the  pro-
social behaviors are quite low, consistent  with
the rates found  in  other  observational  studies
(e.g., Eisenberg-Berg & Lennon,  1980; Yarrow
&  Waxier,  1976). As  indicated  in  the  second
column, at least 73% of the children  exhibited
each  of the  remaining  categories of  prosocial
behavior.

There  were  no  significant  differences  be-
tween  boys  and  girls  in  the  naturalistic  data
or  the  laboratory  measures  (all  ts <  1.6).
Teachers rated  girls higher for  sharing, i(50) =
3.63, p  <  .001; and  comforting,  t(50) =  2.33,
p < .05. Consistent with past research  (Bryan,
1975;  Devries,  1970;  Radke-Yarrow,  Zahn-
Waxler,  &  Chapman,  1983),  two  of  the  be-
haviors  showed  a  positive  relationship  with
age,  cooperative  behavior,  r(50)  =  .27,  p  <
.05,  and  performance  on  the  Penny  Hiding
Game,  r(50)  =  .33, p  < .05.

Analysis  of  Antecedents

Antecedents  were  disproportionately  dis-
tributed  across  prosocial  categories.  Snaring
was  more  likely  to  be  preceded  by  a  request
from  the  recipient  (60%) or was  spontaneous
(29%).  The  remaining  acts  of  sharing  were
preceded  by  direction  from  the  teacher  (7%)
or  another  child  (1%).5  Cooperation  usually
occurred  in  response  to  a  teacher's  request
(60%)  or  was  spontaneous  (21%).  Requests
from  the  recipient  (10%)  or  directions  from
another child (3%) were less frequent.  Helping
behaviors  were  usually  spontaneous  (68%)
rather  than  the  result  of  requests  (12%)  or
direction  by  a  child  (2%)  or  teacher  (10%).
These different  patterns of antecedents suggest
different  motivations for each type of prosocial
behavior.  Sharing  may  be  a  peer-oriented

4 Only one incident  of comforting  behavior was coded;
however,  affectionate  behavior  was  not  recorded  and  the
distress  cues  of  the  recipient  had  to  be  quite  salient
before  the behavior  was coded  as comforting.  Because  of
this low rate the data  with  respect  to comforting  will  not
be discussed  further.

5 Observers did not code antecedents if verbal statements
were  not  clear,  if  the  prosocial  act  occurred  at  the
beginning  of the  observation  session  and  did  not  include
a  sufficient  antecedent  period,  or  if  the  complete  ante-
cedent  circumstances  were not  observable.

50 

RONALD  J.  IANNOTTI

Table  1
Means,  Standard  Deviations,  and Percentages  of  Children  With  Scores  Greater  Than  Zero  for
Observational  Categories,  Laboratory  Measures,  and Teacher  Ratings

Boys

Girls

Behavior

%>  0

Observational categories*

Sharing
Cooperating
Helping
Comforting
Refusing

Laboratory  measures

Helping task
Sharing task
Penny hiding
Gift  choice
Nickel-dime  game

Empathy

Emotional  matching
Situational  role taking
Emotional  role taking

Teacher ratings

Sharing
Cooperating
Helping
Comforting

79
98
73
2
67

37
56
100
96
56

98
75
90

100
100
100
100

M

.031
.078
.015
.000
.030

.52
3.2
8.4
3.3
.55

3.8
2.4
4.0

84.5
89.4
86.7
83.2

SD

.03
.05
.02
.00
.05

.72
3.4
1.4
.87
.62

2.3
1.9
2.0

9.8
8.1
11.4
10.5

M

.030
.091
.029
.000
.010

.38
3.4
9.0
3.6
.76

3.6
1.8
4.4

91.4"
92.2
88.5
88.6C

SD

.04
.05
.03
.00
.01

.67
• 3.6
.97
.98
.63

1.7
2.1
2.5

5.1
5.6
10.9
7.4

* Means for observational  categories were computed  by dividing the frequency  of occurrence by the minutes  observed
for  each  child.
b Girls were rated  as sharing  significantly  more  than  boys (p <  .001).
c Girls  were  rated  as comforting  significantly  more than  boys (p <  .05).

behavior,  partially  motivated  by social  con-  for aid that  are subsequently  refused.  As  in
cerns. Teachers were more likely to define the  past  research,  two laboratory  measures of
goals  of cooperative  interaction  at this  age,  prosocial behavior were unrelated. The same
perhaps because of the children's own prob-  was true of the three measures of perspective
lems with initiating complex tasks, which are 
The structured measure of sharing (sharing
of mutual  interest to peers. The spontaneity 
of  helping  behavior  may reflect  the ability 
task) was significantly correlated with labeling
both to recognize the needs of others and to  others'  emotions  based  on  affective  cues
identify  how to provide aid.

taking.

RelatiotlS  Within  Settings 

6 Spontaneous prosocial behavior was included in fur-
ther analyses because it was of theoretical interest. Teacher-
requested behavior was included as a basis for comparison.
The three categories of prosocial behav-  JJ ^g  S S T E S T S SS  2
prosOcial  categories  should be interpreted  with  caution
lor—sharing,  cooperating, and helping—were 
Summed  to  provide  a  total  rate  of prosocial 
because they are not independent; since each  prosocial
behavior.  The  correlation  matrix6  for  two  event was coded for antecedent and category, frequencies
antecedents, the more frequent  observational  within  jPf^  ™ 

i e t aJi  ?*cher

  r a tT i , Tr

t

'. 

.  .  . 

. 

,  ., 

,  , 

. 

excluded  from  the  tables  and subsequent  analysis for

categories,  the total  rate,  and the laboratory 
measures,  are  presented  in  Table  2.  Within 
the  same  settings, the observational  categories 
of  prosocial  behavior  were  unrelated  except 
, 
I 
that  sharing  was correlated  with  refusing  to 
be  prosocial.  It  may be  that  children  who 
share  receive disproportionately  more  requests  were significant,  four would be expected by chance.

c l a r hy  of  p r e s e n t a t i o n.  Although  they  were  internally
consistent,  the teacher  ratings  were  unrelated  to the
naturalistic  observations  of  prosocial  behavior.  One
h u n d r ed  **> correlations  were  computed  in  Table 2;

w o u ld  te  e x p e c t ed  by  c h a n ce  Seveaty  ^ 
correlations  were  computed  for  teacher  ratings;  eight

twenty  two were  significant;  five  significant  correlations

a d d i t i o n al

i  .!  j 

, 

• i_ 

*•  • 

. 

PROSOCIAL  BEHAVIOR

51

1
0
-

7
1
-

s

2

1
2
-

4
0
-

§

©

<N

8

o

o 
\c  ^  —. 
O  O  O  O 
I

ll 

o\  ON  as
—  CM  —.

I

O 
I 

©
I

o o * © v ^ f * 1 f^ 
—  O  — O  — 
I 
I 

O  —•  —
C N C N f)

I

7  7 

i 7

I

00 —
o 

i
o

—  rsi

SO  5  Os  O 
©  © 

* 
iri  v>  —  f*"i  O  O  —'

SO  «*>  —•  —<  >/1

• 

•

op  TT —  O  Os
CS 
I 
I

I 

I

o  fs

11

g

I

oo  m (S  m
—  O  —  CM

op as
as  .S  C
•H  -S  '-2
•g  s  a
"  U  u
1 s !

S E liillif|llJil

B ••3

—«  <s  m  ^* «n so r-

2

oo  o\  o  —•  <N  Q.  t*>  •&  <n

o

I

8
v

p
V

v

I

I

1

1
1
1

"8

I

52

RONALD  J.  IANNOTTI

(emotional  role  taking)  and  was  negatively
related to role-appropriate gift choice. Helping
an adult was positively correlated with using
situational  cues  to  identify  another's  affect
(situational  role taking). The teacher ratings,
not  shown  in  Table  2, were  all  significantly
related to each other, with correlations ranging
from  .60 to .75.

Relations Between Settings

In  spite  of  the  relative  independence  of
these  behaviors  within  settings,  there  were
some relationships between  settings. Sponta-
neous prosocial behavior was negatively cor-
related  with  a  cognitive  task,  the  Nickel-
Dime Game, and positively  related  to sensi-
tivity to other's affective  cues. Sharing in the
preschool  was positively  correlated  with  the
laboratory  measure  of  sharing  and  with  la-
beling another's affect based on the emotional
cues. Being asked to demonstrate a prosocial
behavior but refusing to do so was associated
with  laboratory  measures of sharing  and re-
sponding emotionally to consistent cues.

The  teacher  ratings  (omitted  from  Table
2)  were  not  related  to  any  of  the  naturally
occurring prosocial behaviors. Teacher rating
of comforting  was positively  correlated  with
performance on the Gift Choice Task, r(50) =
.34, p  < .05, and  negatively  correlated  with
sharing  in  the  laboratory  setting,  r(50) =
- . 3 9 , / x . O l.

Discussion

Analysis of Assessment Procedures

Different  categories  of  prosocial  behavior
were unrelated within the same setting. This
was the case for  the  four  categories assessed
in  the  natural  setting  as  well  as  the  two
categories,  helping  and  sharing,  which  were
assessed with structured  tasks (cf.  Eisenberg-
Berg  &  Lennon,  1980;  Yarrow  &  Waxier,
1976).  Performance  on  the  three  structured
measures of perspective taking was also rela-
tively independent (cf. Kurdek,  1977; Rubin,
1978). Studies that  rely on a single measure
of prosocial  or social-cognitive  behavior  are
not  readily  generalizable  to  other  behaviors
or contexts.

Are  structured  measures  of  prosocial  be-

havior  valid  predictors  of  prosocial  inter-
changes in the preschool setting? The sharing
task  was related  to  sharing  in  the  preschool
setting. The helping task was not  significantly
related to any category of prosocial behavior.
The  sharing  task  involved  generosity  to  a
friend,  whereas  the  helping  task  involved
assisting  an  adult.  One  explanation  for  the
independence  between  structured  and  natu-
ralistic measures of helping is that the setting,
contextual constraints, and focus of attention
are  all  situational  determinants  of  prosocial
behavior. The sharing task involved a proso-
cial  act  that  was  structurally  similar  to  be-
havior  coded  as  sharing  in  the  preschool;
sharing required  the child  to relinquish  part
or  all  of  a  possession  for  the  benefit  of  a
friend.  The outcome of the helping task was
similar  to  helping  in  the  preschool  setting,
that  is, providing  aid,  but  the  recipient  was
an adult, not a peer. Prosocial behavior toward
peers  may  involve  different  processes  than
that toward adults (Zahn-Waxier, Iannotti, &
Chapman,  1982).  When  these  elements  are
similar,  as  with  the  sharing  task,  predictive
validity is possible.

The behaviors identified for teacher ratings
were  almost  identical  to  those  observed  in
the preschool.  In contrast  to the  other  mea-
sures, the teacher ratings of prosocial behavior
were  consistent  across  categories  and  across
eliciting situations. This  consistency  may be
a  product  of  the  breadth  of  the  teacher's
experience  with  each  child.  It  is  possible,
however,  that  observer  biases  confound  the
validity  of  teacher's  ratings.  Sex  differences
favoring  females  were present  for two of the
categories. These findings conform to our sex
role stereotypes but do not correspond to the
observational  data  reported  here  and  else-
where (e.g., Barrett,  1979). Furthermore, lack
of  correlation  between  teacher  ratings  and
structured  or observational measures of pro-
social behavior indicate that the use of teacher
ratings as the sole measure of behavior should
be avoided.

Mediators of Prosocial Behavior

Two  processes  frequently  linked  to  the
development  of  prosocial  behavior  are  em-
pathy  and  social  perspective  taking  (Aron-
freed,  1968; Hoffman,  1975; Iannotti, 1975b;

PROSOCIAL  BEHAVIOR

53

Staub,  1971).  Previous findings with  regard
to  the  empathy-altruism  relationship  have
not  been  consistent  (Underwood  & Moore,
1982a). These inconsistencies may be due to
the  variety  of  measures  that  tap  different
empathic processes (Iannotti,  1975a). The six
forms  of  empathy  assessed  in  the  present
study were not uniformly reliable. The variety
of measures in use and the lack of reliability
in younger children may account for previous
failure  to find consistent  relationships across
all measures of empathy and in all age groups.
The  relationship  between  different  forms
of  empathy  and  prosocial  behavior  are  de-
pendent  on  the  operational  definitions  of
these  processes,  for  example,  whether  the
empathic  response  is  affective  or  cognitive,
whether the prosocial  behavior  is elicited by
an adult, requested by a peer, or spontaneous
(see  Table  2).  Responses  to  the  empathy
stimuli  were  predictors  of  various  observa-
tional  measures  of  prosocial  behavior.  Rec-
ognizing another's affect  based on situational
cues  (situational  role  taking)  was  related  to
helping  an  adult  in  a  structured  setting  and
was a predictor of teacher-requested prosocial
behavior.  Situational  cues  may  indicate  the
form  of aid that  is required.

Inferring  another's emotions based  on the
affective  cues  of  the  other  (emotional  role
taking) was a predictor of sharing in both the
structured  and  the  natural  settings,  was the
best single predictor of spontaneous prosocial
behavior, and was the best structured measure
predicting the composite prosocial score. This
is  consistent  with  the  relationship  between
affective  labeling  and  sharing  reported  by
Tierney  (1976).  Sharing  behavior  may  be
mediated by responses to affective cues. Once
recognizing  that  the  other  is  in  need,  the
altruist  feels sympathy, not empathy,  for  the
other child and is motivated toward prosocial
sacrifice  to  benefit  the  other.  That  is,  the
young child apparently does not have to feel
the  emotions  of the  other  (emotional  empa-
thy) but merely needs to be able to recognize
the  affective  cues  (cf.  Tierney,  1976). There
is  substantial  evidence  that  response  to  an-
other's emotions relates to prosocial behavior,
this  relationship  depends  on  the  form  of
prosocial behavior, the nature of the empathic
cues, and the quality of the response to those
cues.  Other  research  supports  the  notion  of

a complex relationship between empathy and
prosocial behavior depending on a variety of
factors,  including contextual  elements (Gove
& Keating,  1979; Miller,  1979; Radke-Yarrow
et al.,  1983).

Antecedents of Prosocial Behavior

Children  frequently  exhibit  prosocial  be-
haviors without receiving direct requests from
the recipient or indirect requests from teachers
or  peers.  Spontaneous  prosocial  behaviors
account  for  28% of the prosocial  acts. There
is evidence that  these children were sensitive
to the needs of the other child. Two examples
illustrate this point. The path of a child with
an armload of Playdough was blocked by two
chairs.  Another  child  stopped  her  ongoing
activity  and  moved  the  chair  before  the ap-
proaching  child  reached  it.  In  another  ex-
ample, a boy saw another child spill a puzzle
on  the  floor  and  assisted  him  in  picking  it
up. Responding to the needs of others without
an  explicit  request  would  suggest  that  these
children  understood the feelings and motives
of  others  (perspective  taking)  and  acted  on
this awareness. The potential relationship be-
tween  altruism  and  perspective  taking  may
be  dependent  on  whether  a  child  sponta-
neously  applies  perspective-taking  processes
in the social context.

Contrary to theoretical expectations, spon-
taneous prosocial  behavior  was unrelated  or
negatively  related  to  structured  measures of
social perspective taking. Two hypotheses for
these findings deserve  further  consideration.
First, the measures of perspective taking may
be inadequate  for  assessing the processes in-
volved  in  prosocial  behavior  or  too  context
specific  to  generalize  to  other  settings.  The
competitive  nature  of  two  of  the  tasks,  the
Nickel-Dime  Game  and  the  Penny  Hiding
Game,  may  invoke  motivational  processes
incompatible with prosocial behavior.

The  second  hypothesis  is  that,  in  fact,
general  perspective-taking  skills  may  be  un-
related to prosocial behavior at this early age.
The meta-analysis performed  by Underwood
and  Moore  (1982a)  led them  to  the  conclu-
sions that the relationship is most evident in
older children.  Iannotti  (1979) provided evi-
dence that more advanced  perspective-taking
processes  than  those  exhibited  in  these pre-

54

RONALD  J.  IANNOTTI

school  children  are  involved  in  the  sharing
of  older  children  and  that  the  relationship
between  general  perspective  taking  and pro-
social  behavior  is  not  evident  until  these
more advanced levels are attained. A negative
relationship between the sharing task and the
Gift  Choice  Game  was  found.  Again,  this
suggests that in children this young, concern
with nonaffective  cues may be inappropriate
to a  sharing  response  (Eisenberg  & Lennon,
1980;  Johnson,  1975;  Rubin  &  Schneider,
1973; Rushton & Wiener, 1975; Zahn-Waxler
et  al.,  1977).  Although  perspective  taking
may  be  evident  in  specific  prosocial  acts,
competencies  in  perspective  taking does  not
assure increased rates of prosocial behavior.

Conclusions

It  is  clear  that  these  young  children  are
sensitive to  the  needs and  emotions  of their
peers  and  that  some  use  this  awareness  in
their  social  interchanges.  However,  the  lack
of a consistent relationship between perspec-
tive  taking  and  prosocial  behavior  in  the
natural  setting implies that,  for  preschoolers
at least, the capacity to understand the point
of  view  or  cognitions  of  another  does  not
assure prosocial behavior. Indeed, such a skill
may  also  help  the  child  find  alternatives  to
prosocial  behavior.  We  need  to  determine
what  influences  some children  to apply  per-
spective taking to the prosocial  context. The
child's  interpretation  of  another's  emotions
and  its  relationship  to  prosocial  behavior,
particularly  spontaneous  prosocial  behavior,
also deserves further  attention.

Different  patterns  of  prosocial  behavior
may reflect  differences  in the child's process-
ing of situational and motivational cues. Cog-
nitive and affective processes may have differ-
ent functions in different  prosocial behaviors.
Certainly we must be cautious to avoid over-
reliance on any single measure of perspective
taking, empathy, or prosocial behavior. Mul-
tiple measures, which reflect  various contex-
tual  and  motivational  systems  and  that  are
sensitive  to  differences  in  types  of  prosocial
behavior and in the recipients as well as the
altruists, are required for a broad examination
of prosocial behavior. Assessment procedures
that are limited in scope fail to address these
issues and could lead to overgeneralization of
context-specific  findings.

References

Ahammer,  I. M.  & Murray, J.  P. (1979). Kindness in  the
kindergarten: The relative influence of role playing and
prosocial television in facilitating altruism.  International
Journal of Behavioral Development,  2,  133-157.

Aronfreed,  J. (1968). Conduct  and conscience. New York:

Academic  Press.

Barrett, D. E. (1979). A naturalistic study of sex  differences
in children's aggression. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 25,
193-203.

Borke,  H.  (1971).  Interpersonal  perception  of  young
children:  Egocentrism  or  empathy?  Developmental
Psychology, 5,  263-269.

Bryan,  J.  H.  (1975). Children's  cooperation  and  helping
behaviors.  In  E.  M.  Hetherington  (Ed.),  Review  of
child  development  research  (Vol.  5,  pp.  127-181).
Chicago: University  of  Chicago  Press.

Buckley, N., Siegel, L. S., & Ness, S. (1979). Egocentrism,
empathy,  and  altruistic  behavior  in  young  children.
Developmental Psychology, 15,  329-330.

Chandler,  M.  J.  (1973).  Egocentrism  and  antisocial  be-
havior:  The  assessment  and  training  of social  perspec-
tive-taking  skills.  Developmental  Psychology,  9,  326-
332.

Devries,  R.  (1970).  The  development  of  role-taking  as
reflected  by  behavior  of  bright,  average,  and  retarded
children  in a social guessing game. Child  Development,
41,  759-770.

Eisenberg-Berg, N., & Hand,  M. (1979). The  relationship
of  preschoolers'  reasoning  about  prosocial  moral  con-
flicts  to  prosocial  behaviors.  Child  Development,  50,
356-363.

Eisenberg-Berg,  N.,  &  Lennon,  R.  (1980).  Altruism  and
the  assessment  of  empathy  in  the  preschool  years.
Child Development, 51,  552-557.

Feshbach,  N.,  &  Roe,  K.  (1968).  Empathy  in  six-  and

seven-year-olds.  Child  Development,  39,  133-145.

Flavell, J. H.  (1968).  The development of role-taking and

communication  skills  in children. New  York: Wiley.

Gove,  F.  L.,  &  Keating,  D.  P.  (1979).  Empathic  role-
taking precursors. Developmental Psychology,  15,  594-
600.

Hay,  D.  F. (1979).  Cooperative  interactions  and  sharing
between  very  young children  and  their parents. Devel-
opmental  Psychology, 15, 647-653.

Hoffman,  M. L. (1975). Developmental synthesis of  affect
and  cognition  and  its  implications  for  altruistic  moti-
vation. Developmental Psychology, 11, 605-622.

Iannotti,  R. J.  (1975a).  The many faces  of empathy:  An
analysis  of the definition and evaluation of empathy  in
children. Paper presented  at the meeting of the Society
for  Research  in  Child  Development,  Denver.  (ERIC
Document  Reproduction  Service  No.  ED  143444)

Iannotti,  R.  J.  (1975b). The  nature  and  measurement  of
empathy  in  children.  The  Counseling  Psychologist,
5(2),  21-24.

Iannotti, R. J. (1978). The effect  of role-taking experiences
on  role  taking,  empathy,  altruism,  and  aggression.
Developmental Psychology, 14,  119-124.

Iannotti,  R.  J.  (1979,  March).  The  elements  of  empathy.
Paper  presented  at  the  meeting  of  the  Society  for
Research in Child Development, San Francisco. (ERIC
Document  Reproduction  Service  No.  ED  171399)

PROSOCIAL  BEHAVIOR

55

Johnson,  D.  W.  (1975).  Cooperativeness  and  social  per-
spective  taking.  Journal  of  Personality  and  Social
Psychology, 31,  241-244.

Kurdek,  L.  A. (1977).  Structural  components  and  intel-
lectual  correlates  of  cognitive  perspective  taking  in
first- through  fourth-grade children. Child Development,
48,  1503-1511.

Kurdek,  L. A. (1979). Assessment  of children's perspective
taking  skills:  Researcher's  perspective.  Unpublished
manuscript,  Wright  State  University.

Miller, S. M. (1979). Interrelationships among dependency,
empathy,  and  sharing.  Motivation  and  Emotion,  3,
183-199.

Mussen, P., & Eisenberg-Berg, N. (1977). Roots  of caring,

sharing,  and  helping.  San  Francisco,  CA:  Freeman.

Radke-Yarrow,  M.,  Zahn-Waxler,  G,  &  Chapman,  M.
(1983)  Children's  prosocial  dispositions  and  behavior.
In  M.  Hetherington  (Ed.), Manual  of child  psychology
(Vol. 4,  pp. 469-545).  New  York: Wiley.

Rubin,  K.  H.  (1978).  Role  taking  in  childhood:  Some
methodological considerations. Child  Development,  49,
428-433.

Rubin,  K. H., & Schneider, F. W. (1973). The  relationship
between  moral  judgment,  egocentrism,  and  altruistic
behavior.  Child  Development,  44,  661-665.

Rushton,  J.  P.  (1976).  Socialization  and  the  altruistic
behavior  of  children.  Psychological  Bulletin,  83,  893-
913.

Rushton, J. P., & Weiner, J. (1975). Altruism and cognitive
development  in  children. British  Journal  of Social  and
Clinical  Psychology, 14,  341-349.

Sawin, D. B. (1979, April). Assessing  empathy  in children:
A  search for  an  elusive  construct.  Paper  presented  at
the  meeting  of  the  Society  for  Research  in  Child
Development,  San  Francisco.

Selman,  R.  L.,  &  Byrne,  D.  F.  (1974).  A  structural-

developmental  analysis  of role  taking  in  middle  child-
hood.  Child  Development,  45,  803-806.

Shantz, C. U. (1975). The development of social cognition.
In M.  Hetherington  (Ed.), Review  of child  development
research (Vol.  5, pp.  257-323).  Chicago: University  of
Chicago  Press.

Staub,  E.  (1971).  The  use  of  role  playing  and  induction
in  children's  learning of  helping and  sharing  behavior.
Child  Development,  42,  805-816.

Tierney, M. C. (1976).  The relationship  between  altruism,
empathy  and  moral judgment  in  young  children.  Un-
published  manuscript,  University  of  Windsor.

Tonick,  I. J.,  Gelfand,  D.  M.,  Hartmann,  D.  P., Cromer,
C.  C.  &  Millsapp,  R.  (1977,  August).  A  naturalistic
study  of children's  prosocial  behavior. Paper  presented
at  the  annual  meeting  of  the  American  Psychological
Association,  San  Francisco.

Underwood,  B., & Moore,  B. (1982a).  Perspective-taking

and  altruism.  Psychological Bulletin,  91,  143-173.

Underwood,  B., &  Moore,  B. S. (1982b).  The  generality
of  altruism  in  children.  In  N.  Eisenberg  (Ed.),  The
development  of  prosocial  behavior  (pp.  25-52).  New
York: Academic  Press.

Yarrow,  M.  R.,  & Waxier, C.  Z. (1976). Dimensions  and
correlates  of  prosocial  behavior  in  young  children.
Child  Development,  47,  118-125.

Zahn-Waxler,  C,  Iannotti,  R.,  &  Chapman,  M.  (1982).
Peers  and  prosocial  development.  In  K.  H.  Rubin  &
H.  S.  Ross  (Eds.),  Peer relationships  and  social  skills
in childhood (pp.  133-162).  New York: Springer-Verlag.
Zahn-Waxler,  C,  Radke-Yarrow,  M.,  &  Brady-Smith,  J.
(1977).  Perspective-taking  and  prosocial  behavior.  De-
velopmental  Psychology, 13, 87-88.

Received  April  30,  1982

Revision  received  November  16,  1983  •

Call for  Nominations

The  Publications  and  Communications  Board  has  opened  nominations  for  the
editorship  of  Developmental  Psychology  for  the  years  1987-1992.  Sandra  Scarr  is
the incumbent editor. Candidates must be members of APA and should be available
to start receiving manuscripts in early  1986 to prepare for issues published in  1987.
To nominate candidates, prepare a statement  of one page or less in support of each
nomination. Submit nominations no later than February  1,  1985 to:

Anne Danielson Pick
ATTN: Journal Search Committee
Institute for Child Development
University of Minnesota
51 East River Road
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455

