 
 
Theory of Mind and Social Behavior: Causal Models Tested in a Longitudinal Study
Author(s): Jennifer M. Jenkins and  Janet Wilde Astington
Source: Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, Vol. 46, No. 2 (April 2000), pp. 203-220
Published by: Wayne State University Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23093714
Accessed: 12-06-2020 11:23 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Wayne State University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to Merrill-Palmer Quarterly

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, Vol. 46, No. 2

 Theory of Mind and Social Behavior:

 Causal Models Tested in a Longitudinal Study

 Jennifer M. Jenkins and Janet Wilde Astington

 University of Toronto

 The aim of this study was to test two competing causal models concerning the rela
 tionship between children's social behaviors and theory of mind. Children between
 3 and 4 years of age (η = 20) at the time of first testing were assessed three times over
 approximately 7 months. Theory of mind was assessed using false belief tasks. Chil
 dren were videotaped during play with a friend, and measures of pretend play, joint
 planning, and explicit role assignment were made on the basis of transcripts. Theory
 of mind understanding was found to predict joint planning and role assignment, after
 taking into account initial performance on joint planning and role assignment, as
 well as contemporaneous language ability and age. There was no evidence that
 social behaviors predicted children's theory of mind.

 Children's understanding of their own and others' minds undergoes a

 profound change toward the end of the preschool years. Children come
 to realize that another person may have and act on beliefs that are differ
 ent from their own, and therefore false from their point of view (Wimmer
 & Perner, 1983). They recognize that they themselves may sometimes
 hold false beliefs (Gopnik & Astington, 1988). They understand that an
 object may appear different from what it really is, so that they or another
 person might hold a false belief about its identity (Flavell, Flavell, &
 Green, 1983). The contemporaneous development of these insights leads
 to what is called children's representational theory of mind (Astington,
 Harris, & Olson, 1988).

 Jennifer Jenkins and Janet Wilde Astington, Human Development and Applied Psy

 chology.

 We are grateful to the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada
 and to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. We are also
 indebted to the children who took part in this study, to J. J. Fueser, Elizabeth Lee, Stephanie
 Mathany, Jan Pelletier, and Alan Polak for data collection, transcription, and coding, and
 to Sve Elgie for statistical advice.

 Correspondence may be sent to Jenny Jenkins, Human Development and Applied Psy
 chology, OISE/UT, University of Toronto, 252 Bloor St. West, Toronto, Ontario, Canada,
 M5S 1V6 or jenny.jenkins@utoronto.ca.

 Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, April 2000, Vol. 46, No. 2, pp. 203-220.
 Copyright © 2000 by Wayne State University Press, Detroit, Ml 48201

 203

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 204

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 The term "theory of mind" also has been used more broadly to refer
 to children's social understanding, as revealed in their talk about people's
 thoughts, intentions, and desires. This development usually begins in the
 second year of life (Bretherton, McNew, and Beeghly-Smith, 1981 ). Here
 we use the term theory of mind in a narrower sense. We use it to refer to
 the attribution of false belief and the ability to distinguish between
 appearance and reality that emerges when children are between 3 and 4
 years old. Our focus in this paper is on relations between this specific
 aspect of theory of mind and children's social behavior.

 The development in children's ability to represent their own and oth

 ers' beliefs might be expected to have important consequences for chil
 dren's social interactions. A general assumption is made that this is the
 case (Moore & Frye, 1991), although until recently there has been little
 study of relations between children's theory of mind and their behavior in
 natural settings. Some authors have remarked on changes in children's
 behavior, such as the way they play hide-and-seek, that develop around
 the same age as that at which they start to pass false belief tasks (Perner,
 1991; Wellman, 1990). More to the point, some recent empirical studies
 directly relate social behavior to theory-of-mind task performance (Asting
 ton & Jenkins, 1995; Frith, Happe, & Siddons, 1994; Lalonde & Chandler,
 1995; Taylor, Gerow, & Carlson, 1993). However, in only one project have
 such relations been examined over time (Dunn, 1995; Dunn, Brown,
 Slomkowski, Tesla, & Youngblade, 1991; Youngblade & Dunn, 1995).
 Children with autism have severe difficulties with social interaction

 and generally fail false belief tasks. The minority who pass false belief
 tasks are rated more highly for both social and antisocial behaviors that
 depend on recognizing and manipulating other people's mental states
 (Frith et al., 1994). Likewise, 3- and 4-year-olds' false belief task perfor
 mance correlates with ratings of their social maturity on a subscale of
 items judged to require understanding other minds (Lalonde & Chandler,
 1995). Three- and 4-year-olds who score higher on a composite theory
 of-mind measure also engage in more fantasy and pretense, controlling
 for age and verbal intelligence (Taylor et al., 1993). Considering relations
 over time, children aged 3;4 who were able to explain actions based on
 false beliefs had engaged at the age of 2;9 in more role enactment in pre
 tend play, participated in more conversation about feelings and causal
 relations, and cooperated more with their siblings (Dunn et al., 1991;
 Youngblade & Dunn, 1995). Later, in kindergarten, these children were
 more likely to understand conflicting emotions, showed more sensitivity
 to criticism, and had more negative perceptions at the beginning of the
 school year than children who failed the false belief explanations task at
 age 3;4 (Dunn, 1995).

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Theory of Mind

 205

 The correlations described in all of these studies suggest that the

 experimental assessment of children's theory of mind, using false belief
 and other tasks, is tapping a genuine change in children's cognition,
 because this change is associated with naturally occurring everyday
 behaviors. Some authors suggest that the association found between pre
 tense and theory of mind is consistent with the view that early pretend
 play encourages the development of theory of mind (Flavell, Flavell, &
 Green, 1987; Taylor et al., 1993; Youngblade & Dunn, 1995). Nonethe
 less, all of them refrain from making causal claims from their findings.
 Similarly, when we found that performance on false belief tasks was

 correlated with proposing joint activities and assigning roles in pretend
 play, we conceded that we could not make any claim about the direction
 of causality that might be operating (Astington & Jenkins, 1995). In that
 study 30 children aged 3;1 to 5;5 were given four false belief tasks and a
 standard test of language ability, and they were videotaped during 10 min
 of pretend play. Controlling for age and language ability, we found signif
 icant correlations between false belief task performance and the fre
 quency with which children explicitly made joint proposals or assigned
 roles to themselves or another during the pretend play. False belief under
 standing was not related to the amount of pretend play, only to these spe
 cific aspects of the play.

 These findings were consistent with the hypothesis that pretend play

 supports theory-of-mind development. However, they are equally consis
 tent with the alternative view that developing an understanding of others'
 minds changes the nature of children's pretend play, increasing the fre
 quency with which children generate explicit joint plans and make
 explicit role assignments. We argued that the ability to simultaneously
 represent multiple and contrasting beliefs will lead to social behavior in
 which multiple roles are adopted by participants and plans with multiple
 agents are proposed between people, precisely because such social skills
 rely on the simultaneous representation of multiple belief states. The
 acquisition of false belief understanding makes children more likely to
 see the need to be explicit within the ambiguous context of pretend play
 because they understand that beliefs can differ between people. They are
 more likely to initiate joint plans because this ability to hold in mind mul
 tiple and potentially conflicting beliefs allows them to be more skilled in
 coordinating their own plans, intentions, and beliefs with those of other
 people. The alternative causal model would argue that practice in gener
 ating joint plans and making role assignments leads to the development
 of false belief understanding.

 The present study was designed to test these competing hypotheses.
 We hypothesize that the development of a theory of mind has conse

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 206

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 quences for children's ability to interact with other people, which is seen
 in the quality of their pretend play. As children acquire the ability to rep
 resent their own and others' beliefs, they develop social behaviors such as
 the ability to make plans with another child, and to communicate explic
 itly about aspects of play that may be ambiguous. Hence, in this study we
 test such a causal model of the relationship between children's theory of
 mind and their social behaviors during interaction with other children.

 METHOD

 Participants

 Twenty children in the nursery class at a university laboratory school
 were the participants in this study. They were between 34 and 45 months
 old when the study commenced, and data collection continued for 7
 months. At the laboratory school, parents give written consent at the
 beginning of each school year to a general class of studies involving cog
 nitive and social-emotional measures. Children give their verbal consent
 to participation.

 Procedure

 Children were assessed on all measures at three time points approx
 imately 3.5 months apart. At each point, theory-of-mind tasks and a
 general test of language ability were administered and children were
 videotaped during play with a partner.

 Measures

 Theory of mind. The children were given three theory-of-mind tasks
 at each time. The order of the tasks and of test questions within tasks was
 counterbalanced across children. One task was a standard "change in
 location" story acted out with dolls (Wimmer & Perner, 1983). A doll
 leaves an object in one place and while he is away it is moved to a new
 place. Then he returns and the child is asked where the doll will look for
 the object. A different story, with different dolls, objects, and locations,
 was used at each time. The second task was a standard "unexpected con
 tents" false belief task (Hogrefe, Wimmer, & Perner, 1986). A familiar box
 was shown to the child and then opened to reveal an unusual content.
 After this was replaced in the box the child was asked what he or she had
 thought was in the box before it was opened and what a friend (named in
 the test question) would think was in the box before it was opened. A dif

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Theory of Mind

 207

 ferent box and content was used each time. At the end of the test session
 at each time point children were asked what was in a box that did con
 tain its usual content. We included this item so that children would not
 think that every box we showed them had an unexpected content. The
 third task was similar to the second, including questions about own belief
 and friend's belief, but used standard appearance-reality test materials
 (Flavell et al., 1983).

 The three tasks yielded six scores: three from questions about another
 person's false belief, two from questions about the child's own false belief
 and one appearance-reality question. The six scores were summed to
 give the child's theory-of-mind score (range 0-6). Internal consistency of
 this measure was examined at each time point. In each test period the
 appearance-reality question was the only question that reduced the relia
 bility of the overall measure. Consequently this measure was dropped
 from the summed score. The internal consistency, assessed by Cronbach's
 alpha was 0.67 at Time 1, 0.65 at Time 2, and 0.86 at Time 3. Although
 the main analyses of this study involve a composite measure of theory-of
 mind understanding, in preliminary analyses in the Results section, find
 ings for individual tasks are presented.

 General language ability. The Test of Early Language Development

 (Hresko, Reid, & Hammill, 1981) was used to assess children's general
 language ability. This test, which has been standardized on children
 between 3 and 7 years, assesses syntactic and semantic skills of children,
 and both their expressive and receptive abilities. Good test-retest reliabil
 ity and internal consistency are reported in the manual (Hresko et al.,
 1981). The test-retest reliability coefficient was found to be .90, when
 1 77 children were tested with a time interval between testing sessions of
 2 weeks. Internal consistency, assessed in a sample of 500 children, was
 found to be α = .90. In a previous study (Jenkins & Astington, 1996), this
 measure was found to be highly correlated with the sentence memory
 measure in the Stanford Binet (r- .76).

 Pretend play video observation. Children played together in pairs in
 a small room equipped with dress-up clothes and props that would
 encourage pretend play. The experimenter withdrew behind the camera
 once play was under way. Children were videotaped for a period of
 approximately 10 min. Videotapes were transcribed with descriptions
 of what the child was holding or who they were talking to when this
 was necessary to determine whether they were engaging in pretend play.
 All transcripts were coded by someone uninformed about the theory-of
 mind scores of children, using the same coding scheme as that used in
 our previous study (Astington & Jenkins, 1995). Tapes were segmented
 into speaker turns. A speaker turn was defined as one child's utterance

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 208

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 bounded by another child's utterances, or, if only one child was speaking,
 a speaker turn was one utterance separated by a silence of 5 s or more
 prior to the next utterance. All comments to the experimenter were
 excluded from analysis.

 Amount of pretend play. Each turn was coded for the presence of

 pretense. This was any speech concerned with nonIiterai play and
 included playing or assigning a role, discussing an imaginary activity,
 substituting one object for another, and using replica objects as real
 objects. Speaker turns that were not coded as pretense included acknowl
 edgments of other children's utterances (e.g., "Oh OK," "Yes"), unfin
 ished phrases too minimal to code as pretense (e.g., Well . . .), and repe
 tition of someone else's pretense without any evidence of new elements
 of pretense (e.g., a child saying "Let's go to bed now" when he said the
 same on his previous speaker turn).

 All pretend turns were coded for two elements: whether explicit joint

 proposals were made and whether there was evidence of explicit role
 assignment. The raw frequencies of joint proposals and role assignments
 were converted to proportions of the total amount of pretend play. This
 was done because of slight variation in the length of play sessions and in
 the extent of children's participation. The proportions ensured that the
 measures reflected the type of pretend play skills children demonstrated
 when they were involved, independently of their level of involvement.

 Joint proposals. For this to be coded, reference had to be made to
 another person and to the self within the same turn. For example, "Pre
 tend you're squirting me again." Reference to self and other was also
 achieved by the use of first-perso η plural pronouns such as we, us, or our
 to specify the self and other, for example, "There we go, under the
 umbrella in case someone squirts us." One child did not engage in any
 pretend play during the session and received a score "0" on the propor
 tion of pretend turns involving joint play and role assignment.

 Role assignment. This was defined as children assigning a pretend
 role to themselves or to another child. This had to be done verbally and
 explicitly, such as "Let's be firegirls now" or in addressing their peer, "Oh
 hello teacher." Role assignment was not coded if a child was playing at
 being someone, as evidenced by their dress, actions, or change in voice,
 but the child never explicitly said who they were pretending to be.

 Interrater reliability. A second person independently coded 10 tran
 scripts (33% of the total) randomly chosen from the three time points.
 Reliability was assessed in two ways. First we examined the extent to
 which coders agreed on each individual instance of pretense, joint plan
 ning, and role assignment. This was assessed using Cohen's kappa and
 the resulting kappas were pretense, κ = .63; joint planning, κ = .86; role

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Theory of Mind

 Table 1. Means and Standard Deviations of All Variables

 at Three Points in Time

 Time 1

 Time 2

 Time 3

 M

 SD

 Ν

 M

 SD

 Ν

 M

 SD

 Ν

 Theory of mind
 understanding

 1.05
 Joint planning  0.18
 Role assignment 0.01
 Age (in months) 39.56

 1.31
 0.18
 0.02
 3.29

 19
 19
 19
 19

 2.90
 0.20
 0.08
 43.50

 1.52
 0.13
 0.06
 3.35

 20
 20
 20
 20

 3.00
 0.28
 0.07
 46.74

 2.00
 0.17
 0.12
 3.23

 18
 18
 18
 18

 assignment, κ = .75. As the scores used in the analysis were the summed
 score of role assignments (or joint planning) divided by the sum of pre
 tend turns, we also examined the reliability of these proportional mea
 sures. Reliability (assessed by Cronbach's alpha) for the proportion of pre
 tend turns that involved joint planning was α = 0.98, and for the
 proportion of pretend turns that involved role assignment was a = 0.93.

 RESULTS

 Two cases had incomplete data over the three time points. One child

 did not speak during the videotaped play session at Time 1, and this same
 boy refused to be included in the pretend play session at Time 3. The fam
 ily of another child had moved away before Time 3 videotaped play ses
 sions occurred. For analyses including Time 1 variables, Ν = 19. For
 analyses including Time 3 data, Ν = 18 children.

 Table 1 shows the mean and standard deviation of each variable

 at Times 1, 2, and 3. Three repeated-measures analyses of variance
 (ANOVAs) were carried out to determine whether there was a significant
 increase in theory-of-mind understanding, joint planning, and role
 assignment over the 7-month period. Children showed an increase in
 theory-of-mind understanding as a function of time, F(2,16) = 12.7, ρ <
 .001. It is evident from Table 1 that the difference between times is largely
 accounted for by the increase in understanding that takes place between
 Time 1 and Time 2. Children also showed a significant increase in role
 assignment, F(2,16) = 15.7, ρ < .001. As is evident from Table 1 this
 increase occurred between Time 1 and Time 2. It should be noted that at
 Time 1 only two children (5%) showed any instance of role assignment.
 By Time 2, 15 children (75%) showed at least one instance of role assign
 ment. With so little variability at Time 1, it is unlikely that this measure
 will be found to predict change in any other variables. Consequently,

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 Table 2. Intercorrelations of Time 1, 2, and 3 Assessments of Theory of Mind

 (Tom) and Social Behaviors (Joint Planning and Role Assignment)
 Tom 1

 Role 2

 Tom 1
 Tom 2
 Tom 3

 Joint 1
 Joint 2
 Joint 3
 Role 1
 Role 2

 Tom 2 Tom 3 Joint 1  Joint 2
 .54*
 .29
 .08
 .68**

 .47* .39 .41
 .72" .16
 -.06

 Joint 3

 .28
 -.27
 -.34

 .04
 .00

 Role 1
 .48*
 .19
 .29
 -.14
 .15
 .14

 -.04
 .27
 -.02
 .07
 .03
 -.42
 .07

 Role 3
 .53*
 .45
 .25
 .08
 .31
 .31
 .42
 -.21

 'ρ < .05. " ρ .01.

 negative findings in relation to Time 1 role assignment must be viewed
 cautiously. Children did not show a significant increase in joint planning
 across the three time periods, F{2, 16) = 1.4, ρ < .27. Six children (30%)
 showed no joint planning at Time 1, but this dropped to two children
 (5%) at Times 2 and 3.

 It was evident from examination of all variables that Time 3 role

 assignment was skewed, and to reduce the effect of outliers in the multi
 variate analysis, square root transformation was necessary. Analyses were
 run with and without this transformation and significant effects were the
 same. Results cited are based on the transformed variable.

 Table 2 shows the intercorrelation of theory of mind, joint planning,

 and role assignment at and across the three time points. These correla
 tions give an indication of the stability of the theory of mind and social
 behaviors over time. The closer the measures of theory of mind are to one
 another in time, the more strongly they are related to each other: r( 18) =
 .47, ρ < .05, between Times 1 and 2; r = .72, ρ < .001, between Times 2
 and 3; compared with r( 18) = .39, ρ < . 11, between Times 1 and 3. Time
 1 and Time 2 measures of joint planning are strongly related to one
 another, r( 18) = .68, ρ < .002, but measures at other time points are not
 related to one another. None of the measures of role assignment are sig
 nificantly related to one another, although there was a weak association
 between Time 1 and Time 3 role assignment, r(18) = .42, ρ < .09.

 Next, contemporaneous relationships were examined between the
 ory of mind and joint proposals. None of these associations were signifi
 cant, although Time 1 theory of mind was weakly related to Time 1 joint
 planning, r( 18) = .41, ρ < .09, and the relationship at Time 2 was in the
 expected direction. The negative correlation between Time 3 theory of
 mind and Time 3 joint planning, although nonsignificant, was opposite to
 our prediction.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Theory of Mind

 211

 Finally, we examined contemporaneous relationships between the

 ory of mind and role assignment. Time 1 theory of mind was related to
 Time 1 role assignment, r(18) = .48, ρ < .05, and correlations between
 Time 2 and 3 variables were in the expected direction, although not sig
 nificant.

 Although our main theory-of-mind measure is a composite score,
 because few studies use multiple measures of theory-of-mind under
 standing across time, it was also of interest to examine the consistency of
 children's performance on the different tasks. We calculated the mean
 percentage pass rate across the different tasks. The change in location
 task was the most difficult with a mean percentage pass rate of 37%
 across the three time periods. This task also had the lowest pass rate at
 Time 1. The unexpected contents task was next most difficult with mean
 percentage pass rates of 39% (other belief) and 42% (own belief). The
 appearance-reality task was the easiest task with mean percentage pass
 rates of 54% (other belief) and 59% (own belief). Children showed great
 est variability in their performance across individual measures at Times 1
 and 2 (as previously indicated by Cronbach's alpha, reported in the Mea
 sures section).

 Children's performance on the different tasks within each time period
 were compared, and the percentage agreement was determined across
 two tasks (i.e., the percentage of children who failed both tasks or passed
 both tasks). This was carried out for all 10 combinations of tasks (treating
 own and other belief as separate tasks). Agreement in responses to own
 and other belief questions within each task was high at each time period
 for both the unexpected contents task (range = 89%-95% for the three
 different time points) and the appearance-reality task (range = 74%-80%).
 At Time 1 the range across the remaining 8 combinations of tasks was 57%
 to 84%. Thus, in the combination of tasks that produced the most discrep
 ancy in children's performance (the worst case combination), 43% of chil
 dren at Time 1 passed one task but not another. At Time 2 the range across
 the remaining 8 combinations of tasks for children showing the same
 responses on two tasks was 40% to 65%. Thus, in the worst case combi
 nation of tasks, 60% of children atTime2 passed one task but not another.
 At Time 3 the range across the remaining 8 combinations of tasks for chil
 dren showing the same responses on two tasks was 67% to 94%. There
 was no evidence that one particular combination of tasks was more prob
 lematic than any other, when these combinations were compared across
 time periods.

 These results indicate that there is substantial variability in children's

 performance across different theory-of-mind tasks, especially when the
 development of their understanding is in the early stages. Particularly at

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 Times 1 and 2, a substantial proportion of children are able to pass one
 task but not another. Although there is sufficient consistency in individual
 scores to treat the phenomenon as a unitary construct, as evidenced by
 the internal consistency statistic, there is also enough variability across
 tasks to make it clear that development in this area is not an "all-or-none
 phenomenon." Children seem to acquire this understanding gradually, as
 previously noted (Jenkins & Astington, 1996).

 Analytic Strategy

 To establish the direction of effect between theory of mind and social
 behaviors, two different global causal models were compared: (a) theory
 of mind affects social behaviors and (b) social behaviors affect the devel
 opment of theory of mind.

 To test the model that theory of mind affects social behaviors, two
 multivariate multiple regressions were run: one in which Time 1 theory of
 mind predicted Time 2 and Time 3 social behaviors, and one in which
 Time 2 theory of mind predicted Time 3 social behaviors. By carrying out
 a multivariate multiple regression, the risk of a Type 1 error was reduced
 and allowed us to determine whether the criterion variables both within
 and across time were redundant. If it is the case that theory-of-mind
 development affects the development of social behaviors, we would
 expect to see Time 1 theory of mind related to Time 2 and Time 3 joint
 planning and role assignment and Time 2 theory of mind related to Time
 3 joint planning and role assignment.

 Does Time 1 theory of mind predict Time 2 and Time 3 social behav
 iors?The multivariate multiple regression was significant, F(4, 13) = 3.18,
 ρ = .05. A step-down analysis was performed to examine the unique con
 tribution of each criterion variable to the composite dependent variable.
 In this analysis, criterion variables are hierarchically ordered in terms of
 theoretical significance. Each successive criterion variable is tested with
 the higher priority criterion variables acting as covariates in the analysis,
 to determine whether the new criterion significantly adds to the combi
 nation of criterion variables already tested. The criterion variables were
 given the following order of priority: Time 2 joint planning, Time 2 role
 assignment, Time 3 joint planning, Time 3 role assignment. This order
 was adopted because in our earlier paper (Astington & Jenkins, 1995)
 theory-of-mind understanding was more strongly associated with joint
 planning than role assignment.

 The variable that was significant on step-down analysis was Time 2
 joint planning, step-down F{ 1,16) = 7.12, ρ < .02. Univariate analyses
 showed that Time 1 theory of mind was associated with Time 3 role

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Theory of Mind

 213

 assignment, F(1,16) = 6.19, ρ < .03, but this relationship was already
 accounted for in the composite criterion variable by the higher priority
 criterion variables, and this variable was found not to be significant on
 step-down analysis, step-down F(1,13) = 2.46, ρ < .14. Time 2 role
 assignment was not significant on univariate analysis, F( 1,16) = 0.02, ρ <
 .89, or step-down analysis, step-down F(1,15) = 0.05, ρ < .82. Time 3
 joint planning was not significant on univariate analysis, F(1,16) = 1.36,
 ρ < .26, or step-down analysis, step-down F(1,14) = 2.07, ρ < .17. In
 summary, performance on Time 1 theory-of-mind tasks predicted chil
 dren's performance on joint planning approximately 4 months later.

 Does Time 2 theory of mind predict Time 3 social behaviors? The

 same analysis was carried out with Time 2 theory-of-mind scores as the
 predictor variable and Time 3 social behaviors as the criterion variables.
 The multivariate multiple regression was significant F(2,15) = 4.9, ρ <
 .03. The only variable found to be significant on step-down analysis was
 Time 3 role assignment, step-down F(1,15) = 7.9, ρ < .02. Time 2 theory
 of mind was not related to Time 3 joint planning either on step-down
 analysis, step-down F(1,16) = 1.33, p< .27, or on univariate analysis. In
 summary, Time 2 theory of mind predicted role assignment during play
 assessed approximately 4 months later.

 Alternative Model: Social Behaviors Encourage Development
 of Theory of Mind

 Although one causal direction was hypothesized, we wanted to com

 pare our hypothesized causal model with the alternative. The other
 causal model to be tested was that social behaviors encourage the devel
 opment of theory of mind. If this is the case, we would expect to see joint
 planning and role assignment at Time 1 predicting theory of mind at Time
 2 or Time 3, and joint planning and role assignment at Time 2, predicting
 theory of mind at Time 3.

 Do Time 1 social behaviors predict Time 2 or Time 3 theory of mind?

 A multivariate multiple regression was conducted with Time 2 and Time
 3 theory of mind as the criterion variables and Time 1 social behaviors as
 the predictor variables. The multivariate multiple regression was not sig
 nificant, F(4,30) = 0.69, ρ < .60. Neither of the social variables was a sig
 nificant predictor of Time 2 or Time 3 theory of mind on univariate or
 step-down analysis.

 Do Time 2 social behaviors predict Time 3 theory of mind? A multi
 ple regression was carried out with Time 3 theory of mind as the criterion
 variable and Time 2 social behaviors as the predictor variables. This was
 not multivariate because there was only one criterion variable. Neither of

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 the Time 2 social behaviors was found to predict Time 3 theory of mind,
 F(2,15) = 0.07, p< .93.

 In summary, these two sets of analyses demonstrated that there is

 stronger support for the proposed hypothesis that theory-of-mind devel
 opment has a significant effect on social behavior than the alternative
 hypothesis that social behaviors have a significant effect on theory-of
 mind development. Both joint planning and role assignment at two dif
 ferent time points were found to be affected.

 More Stringent Tests of the Causal Hypothesis

 We followed up the multiple multivariate regression with a multiple

 regression for each of the predictor/criterion relationships that had been
 found to be significant on the multivariate analysis. The aim of this set of
 analyses was to test a causal model more rigorously. This was done in two
 ways. First, by entering in the regression first the repeated measure that
 preceded the criterion measure, any subsequent measure that entered the
 regression was predicting change between the earlier measure of the cri
 terion and the later measure. Thus, if we hypothesize that theory of mind
 predicts later Time 2 joint planning, by entering Time 1 joint planning
 into the equation first, we account for all of the variance of Time 2 joint
 planning that was attributable to Time 1 joint planning. The unaccounted
 for variance in Time 2 joint planning is the extent to which joint planning
 has changed since Time 1. By entering Time 1 theory of mind into the
 equation next we can see whether performance on this variable predicts
 changes on the criterion between Time 1 and Time 2.

 The second aim of these hierarchical regressions was to control for

 other variables that might account for the relationship between predictor
 and criterion variables. In our previous work (Astington & Jenkins, 1995),
 we found that age and language ability mediated the relationship be
 tween theory of mind and social behaviors, although weakly. In testing a
 causal model we wanted to ensure that changes in criterion variables
 could not be accounted for by age or language ability. The measure of
 language ability that was entered was contemporaneous with the crite
 rion variable. Regressions were rerun dropping covariates when (a) the
 covariate added nothing to the prediction of the criterion variable, and
 (b) the covariate was not acting as a suppressor variable.

 For each regression that was carried out, multicollinearity was tested

 for. No combination of predictor variables accounted for more than 50%
 of the variance of any other predictor variable.

 Prediction of Time 2 joint planning. In the first hierarchical regres
 sion, Time 2 joint planning was the criterion variable. Time 1 joint plan

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Theory of Mind

 215

 ning was entered first into the regression followed by age, language, and
 Time 1 theory of mind. Language ability added nothing to the prediction
 of Time 2 joint planning and was dropped from the analysis. Age was
 retained as it was acting as a suppressor variable. After Step 3 with all pre
 dictor variables in the equation, multiple R = .77, F(3,15) = 7.1, ρ < .003.
 After Step 1 with Time 1 joint planning in the equation adjusted R2= .41,
 F( 1,1 7) = 13.5, ρ < .002. After Step 2 with Time 1 joint planning and age
 in the equation, there was no significant increase in R2, adjusted R2 = .38,
 Find1,16) = .18, ρ < .68. After Step 3 when Time 1 theory of mind was
 entered into the equation, there was a significant increase in R2, adjusted
 R2= .51, F/'nc(1,15) = 5.1, p< .04. Thus Time 1 theory of mind accounted
 for approximately 13% of the variance in the change between Time 1 and
 Time 2 joint planning.

 Prediction of Time 3 role assignment. In this hierarchical regression,

 Time 3 role assignment was the criterion variable. Time 2 role assignment
 was entered first into a hierarchical regression followed by age, language,
 and Time 2 theory of mind. Neither language ability nor age was found to
 make a significant contribution to the prediction of role assignment, nor
 did they act as suppressor variables, and they were dropped from further
 analysis. After Step 2 with both variables in the equation, multiple R =
 .57, F(2,15) = 3.7, ρ = .05. After Step 1 R2= .05, F(1,16) = .82, ρ < .38.
 After Step 2 when Time 2 theory of mind was entered into the equation,
 R2 = .33, F/'nc(1,15) = 6.3, ρ < .03. In summary, Time 2 theory of mind
 predicted 28% of the variance in the change in role assignment from
 Time 2 to Time 3.

 DISCUSSION

 Our interest was to examine the relationship over time between
 theory-of-mind development and children's play interactions with peers.
 In a previous study we demonstrated contemporaneous associations
 between theory of mind, joint planning, and role assignment during play
 interaction with peers (Astington & Jenkins, 1995). In the present study
 our aim was to examine a causal model in which we hypothesized that
 developments in theory of mind lead to increased abilities to initiate joint
 plans and to assign roles.

 We confirmed our previous results that joint planning and role

 assignment are associated with theory of mind. Theory of mind at Time 1
 predicted 13% of the variance in change in joint planning from Time 1 to
 Time 2. This was the case after controlling for the amount of children's
 joint planning at Time 1, as well as controlling for effects of age and con

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 216

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 temporaneous language performance. Thus, changes in joint planning
 were predicted by performance on theory-of-mind tasks.

 In addition, theory of mind at Time 2 was related to the amount of
 time that children spent during play in explicitly assigning a role to them
 selves or their play partner. This was also the case after controlling for the
 amount of children's role assignment at Time 2, as well as controlling for
 effects of age and contemporaneous language performance. Thus, earlier
 theory-of-mind performance predicted 28% of the variance in change in
 role assignment between Time 1 and Time 2.

 The theory-of-mind construct is sometimes treated as if an under

 standing of other minds is either present or absent. Yet our results relating
 to children's performance on different tasks make it clear that at the first
 two testing points many children are passing some tasks and failing oth
 ers. This suggests that theory of mind is gradually acquired when children
 are between the ages of 2 and 5 years. We obtained the same results
 when we tested a larger group of children on a series of theory-of-mind
 tasks (Jenkins & Astington, 1996).

 Why should theory-of-mind development affect the development of
 these social behaviors? Our view is that being able to represent multiple
 beliefs of the self and other simultaneously, including beliefs that con
 trast with one another, allows for social interactions that are potentially
 less ambiguous and are more geared to the joint endeavors of partici
 pants. Others have found relationships between sociodramatic play and
 developments in children's metacognitive skills. For instance, higher
 levels of sociodramatic play have been found to be associated with chil
 dren's greater ability to take the perspective of the other (Connolly &
 Doyle, 1984; Rubin, 1976). Perspective-taking tasks are not equivalent
 to false belief tasks, but they do assess the child's ability to operate from
 a perspective that is not their own, thus showing some similarity to false
 belief tasks. More recently relationships between sociodramatic play
 and theory of mind have been demonstrated by others (Youngblade &
 Dunn, 1995).

 There has been much less investigation of the relationship between
 the variable that we have called joint planning and theory-of-mind devel
 opment. As humans we have to learn how to cooperate in a complex
 world in which there are multiple agents, each with multiple goals and in
 which unknown and unpredictable elements operate (Oatley, 1992).
 Infants communicate with their parents in expressing goals as well as
 modifying their own goals over time to cooperate with their caregivers.
 Accounts of the way in which parent-infant interaction is highly synchro
 nized and mutually responsive demonstrate that some form of coopera
 tive action is present in early infancy (Stern, 1985). We see our variable

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Theory of Mind

 217

 of joint planning as representing a new stage in the development of coop
 erative action. We propose that part of one's ability to carry out complex
 cooperative plans comes with being able to represent the mental states of
 others that may contrast with one's own. Thus, as children improve in
 representing multiple and contrasting beliefs, they become more skilled
 at the complex undertaking of cooperative action.

 We found no evidence for the opposite causal model to that which

 was hypothesized (i.e., that joint planning and role assignment affect the
 development of theory of mind). One reason for this may be method
 ological. There was very little variability on Time 1 role assignment, mak
 ing it unlikely that an association with any other variables would be
 found. Although this may explain the lack of relationship between Time 1
 role assignment and Time 2 and Time 3 theory of mind, it is not the expla
 nation for the failure in the prediction of Time 1 or Time 2 joint planning,
 or Time 2 role assignment. The variability on these variables was good,
 but they still did not predict later theory-of-mind task performance. Given
 this, we conclude that it is more likely that theory of mind affects the
 development of these social behaviors, rather than the opposite causal
 model. The sample size for this study was small, however, and replication
 with a larger sample will be important.

 Of course, it is not possible from a naturalistic study to be certain
 about the direction of effect in these relationships. In a quasi-experimental
 study these results are only suggestive. Considering only the results from
 the naturalistic longitudinal study, it is still possible that a third variable,
 related to both theory of mind and social behaviors, accounts for the rela
 tionship between them. Although an attempt was made to examine the
 role of a third variable in explaining the association between theory of
 mind and social behaviors (by partialling out effects of age and language
 ability in the regression analyses), it is still possible that other variables, not
 tested in this study, were responsible for these relationships.

 For instance, Plaut and Karmiloff-Smith (1993) have suggested that
 developments in representational architecture underlie the child's ability
 to pass false belief tasks. It is not difficult to imagine that this is also
 responsible for the child's growing capacity to communicate explicit role
 assignments to another person, as well as offer a plan for the self and
 other simultaneously. If this is the case, theory of mind has no causal role
 in affecting joint planning or role assignment, but changes along with
 these other variables, as a consequence of changes in representational
 architecture. Of course, one of the difficulties in hypothesizing a latent
 structure such as representational architecture is that one cannot measure
 it and differentiate it from those observable behaviors that it affects. Train
 ing or intervention studies may throw light on these causal relationships,

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 218

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 as well as providing opportunities for operationalizing these hypothetical
 constructs.

 Youngblade and Dunn (1995) found that children aged 2;9 who
 engaged in more pretend play role enactments performed better on a
 false belief explanations task at age 3;4, and they argue that pretend play
 scaffolds theory-of-mind development, as we mentioned earlier. "Role
 enactment" was coded if the child gave any evidence of playing a par
 ticular pretend role, without explicitly defining it. Explicit definition of a
 role was coded as "role play," which corresponds to our variable "role
 assignment." Youngblade and Dunn did not find that role play at 2;9 was
 related to the ability to give false belief explanations at 3;4. We, on the
 other hand, found that children's earlier false belief task performance pre
 dicted their later production of role assignments.

 We do not believe that our results and those of Youngblade and Dunn

 (1995) contradict each other. Harris (1991 ) argues that children's pretend
 play fosters their ability to simulate feelings and desires not currently held
 and to imagine states of the world not currently existing. Further, he
 argues that it is these abilities that lead to theory-of-mind development,
 allowing the child to understand that other people may hold different
 beliefs about the world and to perform correctly on false belief tasks.
 From this perspective we would expect that some aspects of pretend play,
 such as acting out different roles (Youngblade and Dunn's "role enact
 ment"), would precede and support the development of false belief
 understanding, whereas other aspects of pretend play, such as making
 one's role explicitly clear to one's play partners (our "role assignment"),
 would follow and result from false belief understanding. This is because
 children need to know that people may have different beliefs about the
 world if they are to see the need to make their own view clear in situa
 tions where it may not be so, such as the potentially ambiguous context
 of pretend play. As Youngblade and Dunn put it, "role enactment involves
 mental representation by exemplifying a category of action. Role play, in
 contrast, is genuinely symbolic; the child's behavior designates the
 behavior of another person or character" (1995, p. 1476). That is to say,
 role play (viz., "role assignment" here) is more sophisticated because it
 requires explicit representation of two conflicting states—who the child
 really is and what character he or she is depicting. Thus, we would argue
 that pretend play and theory of mind have a complex and interdependent
 relationship.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Theory of Mind

 REFERENCES

 ASTINGTON, J. W., HARRIS, P. L., & OLSON, D. R. (Eds.). (1988). Developing

 theories of mind. New York: Cambridge University Press.

 ASTINGTON, J. W„ & JENKINS, J. M. (1995). Theory of mind and social under

 standing. Cognition and Emotion, 9,151-165.

 BRETHERTON, I., MCNEW, S„ & BEEGHLY-SMITH, M. (1981). Early person

 knowledge as expressed in gestural and verbal communication: When do
 infants acquire a "theory of mind"? In M. E. Lamb & L. R. Sherod (Eds.), Infant
 social cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 CONNOLLY, J. Α., & DOYLE, A. B. (1984). Relation of social fantasy play to
 social competence in preschoolers. Developmental Psychology, 20,
 797-806.

 DUNN, J. (1995). Children as psychologists: The later correlates of individual dif

 ferences in understanding of emotions and other minds. Cognition and Emo
 tion, 9, 1 87-201.

 DUNN, J., BROWN, J., SLOMKOWSKI, C, TESLA, C, & YOUNGBLADE, L.

 (1991 ). Young children's understanding of other people's feelings and beliefs:
 Individual differences and their antecedents. Child Development, 62,
 1352-1366.

 FLAVELL, J. H„ FLAVELL, E. R., & GREEN, F. L. (1983). Development of the

 appearance-reality distinction. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 95-120.

 FLAVELL, J. H„ FLAVELL, E. R., & GREEN, F. L. (1987). Young children's knowl
 edge about the apparent-real and pretend-real distinctions. Developmental
 Psychology, 23, 816-822.

 FRITH, U„ HAPPE, F., & SIDDONS, F. (1994). Autism and theory of mind in

 everyday life. Social Development, 3, 108-123.

 GOPNIK, Α., & ASTINGTON, J. W. (1988). Children's understanding of represen
 tational change and its relation to the understanding of false belief and the
 appearance-reality distinction. Child Development, 59, 26-37.

 HARRIS, P. L. (1991). The work of the imagination. In A. Whiten (Ed.), Natural
 theories of mind: Evolution, development and simulation of everyday mind
 reading. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

 HOGREFE, G.-J., WIMMER, Η., & PERNER, J. (1986). Ignorance versus false
 belief: A developmental lag in attribution of epistemic states. Child Develop
 ment, 57, 567-582.

 HRESKO, W. P., REID, D. K„ & HAMMILL, D. D. (1981). The Test of Early Lan

 guage Development (TELD). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

 JENKINS, J. M., & ASTINGTON, J. W. (1996). Cognitive factors and family struc
 ture associated with theory of mind development in young children. Devel
 opmental Psychology, 32, 70-78.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MERRILL-PALMER QUARTERLY

 LALONDE, C. E., & CHANDLER, M. (1995). False belief understanding goes to

 school: On the social-emotional consequences of coming early or late to a
 first theory of mind. Cognition and Emotion, 9, 167-185.

 MOORE, C., & FRYE, D. (1991 ). The acquisition and utility of theories of mind. In
 D. Frye & C. Moore (Eds.), Children's theories of mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Erl
 baum.

 OATLEY, K. (1992). Best laid schemes. The psychology of emotions. Cambridge,

 England: Cambridge University Press.

 PERNER, J. (1991). Understanding the representational mind. Cambridge, MA:

 Bradford Books/MIT Press.

 PLAUT, D. C., & KARMILOFF-SMITH, A. (1993). Representational development
 and theory-of-mind computations. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16,
 70-71.

 RUBIN, K. H. (1976). The relationship of social play preference to role taking

 skills in preschool children. Psychological Reports, 39, 823-826.

 STERN, D. (1985). The interpersonal world of the infant. New York: Basic Books.
 TAYLOR, M., GEROW, L. E., & CARLSON, S. M. (1993, March). The relation

 between individual differences in fantasy and theory of mind. Paper pre
 sented at the meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development, New
 Orleans, LA.

 WELLMAN, H. M. (1990). The child's theory of mind. Cambridge, MA: Bradford

 Books/MIT Press.

 WIMMER, H., & PERNER, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and
 constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children's understanding of
 deception. Cognition, 13,103-128.

 YOUNGBLADE, L. M., & DUNN, J. (1995). Individual differences in young chil
 dren's pretend play with mother and sibling: Links to relationships and
 understanding of other people's feelings and beliefs. Child Development, 66,
 1472-1492.

This content downloaded from 139.18.244.34 on Fri, 12 Jun 2020 11:23:19 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

