Developmental  Psychology
1996. Vol. J.2, No.  1,70-78

Copyright  1996 by the American  Psychological  Association,  Inc.
0OI2lfi49/96/$")O0

Cognitive Factors and Family Structure Associated With Theory of

Mind Development in \bung Children

Jennifer M. Jenkins and Janet Wilde Astington

University of Toronto

Factors associated with individual variation in false belief understanding were examined.  Sixty-eight
3- to  5-year-olds were  tested  on  4  standard  false  belief tasks. General  language  ability  and  verbal
memory  were found  to be significant  predictors of false  belief understanding  after  the effects  of age
were partialled out, but nonverbal memory was not. There was evidence for a threshold effect in that
children  did  not  pass false  belief tasks before  they  reached  a certain  level of linguistic  ability.  False
belief scores  were  higher  in  children  from  larger  families,  after  the  effect  of age and  language  had
been  partialled  out.  Family  size  was  more  strongly  associated  with  false  belief  understanding  in
children who were less competent linguistically, suggesting that the presence of siblings can compen-
sate for slower language development in developing false belief  understanding.

The past  10 years have seen rapid growth of a new field of
developmental  research, known  as children's theory  of mind,
which investigates the development of children's ability to un-
derstand human activity by the attribution  of mental states to
people  (Astington,  1993).  Some  time  during  the  preschool
years children acquire the folk psychological understanding that
people generally act in accordance with their desires and beliefs,
that is, they act to fulfill their desires in the light of their beliefs.
An important stage in the development of this understanding is
reached when children recognize that people may act in a way
that frustrates  their desire because their belief is false. For ex-
ample, they may look in the wrong place for a desired  object
because that is where they think they will find the object.

The acquisition of false belief understanding around 4 years
of age is a highly robust, much-replicated finding (Astington &
Gopnik,  1991; Perner, Leekam, & Wimmer,  1987). Moreover,
children's performance on false belief tasks correlates with their
performance on a number of other "theory of mind" tasks, such
as memory of their own earlier mistaken beliefs, understanding
of the appearance-reality distinction, and recognition of the rel-
ative certainty implied by use of the term  know over think or
guess (Gopnik  & Astington,  J988; Moore,  Pure,  & Furrow,
1990). For these reasons, false  belief understanding  has been
taken as a hallmark of the acquisition of a representational the-
ory of mind.

So far, the emphasis in the field has been on describing the
age-related changes in such understanding, with little attention
being given to individual differences  in children's performance
on false belief tasks. By examining individual differences we can

Jennifer  M.  Jenkins  and  Janet  Wilde  Astington,  Institute  of  Child

Study, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

We are grateful  to the children  for their participation  in the study, to
Melanie Mann and Barb Burkholder for data collection and coding, and
to the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council  of Canada.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to either
author at the Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto, 45 Walmer
Road, Toronto, Ontario, Canada  M5R  2X2.

70

gain insights into how false belief understanding relates to other
areas of cognitive and social development. For instance, on the
basis of the work of Dunn and her colleagues, we know that false
belief understanding is related to patterns of interaction within
the  family  as well as to the  child's discourse (Dunn,  Brown,
Slomkowski, Tesla, & Youngblade, 1991).

The goals of the present study were twofold. The first goal was
to  examine  whether  cognitive  processes  {language  and
memory)  were  related  to  false  belief  understanding.  On  the
whole investigators of theory of mind development in  normal
children have not focused their empirical investigation on how
false  belief understanding  relates to the development  of other
cognitive skills. In atypical populations there is evidence to sug-
gest that linguistic ability and theory of mind understanding are
associated with one another. Children with autism show delayed
or deviant language development and generally perform  poorly
on theory  of  mind  tasks (Frith,  1989; Tager-Flusberg,  1993).
Those autistic children who do pass false belief tasks also score
higher on a number of measures of linguistic skill than autistic
children who fail these tasks (Eisenmajer & Prior, 1991).

The  relationship  between  language  and  false  belief  under-
standing can be conceptualized  in a number of different ways.
Some researchers have argued that false belief tasks are linguis-
tically complex,  and that  children  can  understand  them  only
after they reach a certain level of linguistic skill (Chandler, Fritz
&Hala,  1989;Freeman,Lewis,&Doherty,  1991;Siegal&Beat-
tie,  1991). Chandler and his colleagues suggest such a possibil-
ity when they say that Wimmer and Perner's (1983) false belief
task "conflates the actual capacity to entertain beliefs about be-
liefs with the altogether different  ability to comment on this un-
derstanding" (Chandler et al.  1989, p.  1265). Indeed, experi-
mental manipulations that lessen the linguistic load on young
children, result in a greater proportion of young children pass-
ing false belief tasks (Freeman ctal., 1991). One possibility sug-
gested by this work is that language plays an important role in
whether children can perform  the tasks, but bears no relation-
ship to underlying competence. Fodor (1992) has argued that a
simple belief-desire  theory  of  mind  is innate, but  because of

THEORY  OF  MIND  DEVELOPMENT

71

limited processing capacity children  younger than  4 years use
heuristic  shortcuts  in  attempting  to  solve  false  belief  tasks.
Thus, the child's theory of mind undergoes no alteration over
time—the reason that children pass tasks around age 4 is be-
cause performance abilities develop.

Others argue that false belief understanding and language are
related  to  one another  at  a  more  fundamental  level.  For  in-
stance, Plaut and Karmiloff-Smith  (1993) argue that children's
increasing ability to generate and use symbolic representations
explains their improvement in performance on theory of mind
tasks as they get older. With age, symbolic representations be-
come sufficiently elaborated and well-differentiated  so that they
can override interpretations that arise from direct experience.
Language provides "particularly  effective  scaffolding  for sym-
bolic representations" (Plaut & Karmiloff-Smith,  1993, p. 70).
Relatedly, Feldman (1988) discusses the intrinsic relationship
between language and theory of mind development in terms of
the development of recursion.

Researchers have also hypothesized that "processing capac-
ity" may be related to false belief understanding. For instance
Chandler has suggested that the tasks are too "computationally
complex" for 3-year-olds (Chandler etal., 1989, p. 1266). Frye,
Zelazo, and Palfai (1992) argue that performance on false belief
tasks depends on children's ability to make inferences using em-
bedded rules, and suggest that the development  of this ability
depends on increased processing resources. Some have opera-
tionalized this more specifically  in terms of memory  function-
ing. For instance, Case (1989) and  Olson  (1993) both  argue
that the acquisition  of false  belief understanding is related  to
increases in children's working memory capacity.

Although there has been a lot of supposition about the kinds
of cognitive abilities that might be necessary for children to be
able to pass false belief tests, there has been little investigation
of how these abilities co-vary in the real world with false belief
understanding in normal children.

Our second aim was to investigate Perner, Ruffman, and Lee-
kam's (1994) finding that larger family  size is associated with
an earlier acquisition of false belief understanding. Perner et al.
showed that in a sample of seventy-six 3- to 4-year-olds, children
with two siblings were almost twice as likely to pass a standard
false belief task as only children were. If language functioning is
related  to false belief understanding as we hypothesize above,
then  the  association  between  false  belief  understanding  and
family size that Perner et al. find, may be accounted for by in-
creased linguistic ability of children in larger families. Perner et
al. were not able to investigate this possibility because they had
no measure of children's linguistic and cognitive abilities apart
from  their  performance  on the false  belief test. We were also
interested in whether family size affects the acquisition of false
belief understanding to a similar degree across age and linguistic
ability. It could be hypothesized that the presence of siblings is
particularly  important  in  encouraging the acquisition  of  false
belief understanding in young children or less linguistically able
children, making less difference as children get older.

Participants

Method

were drawn  from  one daycare and  one nursery  school affiliated  with
the University of Toronto. Both of these centers serve a well-educated
middle-class  community.  Sixty-nine  children  were recruited  for  the
study. Language data were missing for one child, due to absence from
school. Consequently 68 children were included in the study; this rep-
resents 85% of eligible children. All children spoke English fluently al-
though for  10 children English was their second language. Twenty-two
children  were only children,  32 children had one sibling,  13 children
had two siblings and  1  child had three siblings. Thirty-eight  children
were first-born children, 24 were second-born, 5 were third-born, and  1
was the fourth-bom  child. Thirty-two children were girls, 36 children
were boys.

Procedure

False belief tasks.  Four  different  false  belief  tasks were given  in
counterbalanced order. Two were simple versions of the standard change
in location paradigm (Wimmer & Perner, 1983). The stories were acted
out for the children using toys. For example, a boy doll put a ball in a
box and went away. While he was gone his sister took it out, played with
it, and put it away in a basket. Then the boy returned and wanted to play
with the ball. The children were asked where he would look for it. Two
control questions were given to check that children  remembered both
the original location and the new, actual location of the ball. The other
two tasks involved something unexpected (Perner et al., 1987). In one
of these tasks, children were shown a bandaids box and asked what was
inside (unexpected contents). After they said it had bandaids in it they
were shown that it actually contained pencils. The pencils were put back
inside the box and the children were asked what another child, who had
not  seen  inside the box, would think  was inside it before opening it.
The other "unexpected" task used the picture book from Gopnik and
Astington (1988) in which a partial view of what appear to be cat's ears
are actually the petals of a flower (unexpected  picture). The children
were asked what another child, who saw only the partial view, would
think it was, before seeing the whole picture. For each task the child was
given a  score of 0 (fail)  or  I (pass). A false  belief score was derived
which is the total for all four tasks.

General language ability.  The Test of Early Language Development
(TELD) was used to assess the children's overall language development.
Syntactic and semantic abilities, in both expressive and receptive forms,
are assessed through responses to questions and pictures (Hresko, Reid,
& Hammill, 1981). The test has been standardized on children between
3 and 7 years. Good test-retest reliability and internal consistency have
been established. The children's raw scores were used in the analyses.

Verbal memory.  The sentence memory measure of the Stanford-Bi-
net  was used. The experimenter reads a sentence to the child  who is
asked to say it back to the experimenter. Sentences increase in length
and complexity; testing stops after  four  consecutive failures. The raw
score was used in all analyses.

Nonverbal memory  The bead memory measure of the Stanford-Bi-
net  was  used  to  examine  nonverbal  working  memory.  Children  are
asked to  look  at a picture  of a pattern  of beads and then to recreate
this pattern with actual beads once the picture has been removed. The
patterns increase in complexity and number of beads; testing stops after
four consecutive failures. The raw score was used in all analyses.

Family size and birth order.  On  the  consent  form,  parents were
asked to give the ages of the child's brothers and sisters, if he or she had
any siblings.

Results

False Belief  Understanding

Children between 2 years 11 months and 5 years 5 months were re-
cruited for the study {M = 49.2 months, SD = 7.8 months). Children

It  is  initially  important  to  examine  the  pattern  of  scores
across the different  false  belief tasks. Agreement  between the

72

JENKINS  AND  ASTINGTON

two change in location tasks was 96%. Agreement between the
other two tasks, involving something unexpected, was lower at
88%.  Agreement  across  the  two  different 
types  of  task
(unexpected  task vs. change in location) ranged  from  71% to
77%. For instance, 29% of children passed one task but not an-
other when scores from the unexpected picture task were com-
pared  with  scores  from  one of the change  in  location  tasks.
Thirty-seven  percent of the total sample  passed 4 tasks, 10%
passed  3 tasks,  16% passed 2 tasks,  10% passed  one task and
27% did not pass any tasks. Fifty-five  percent of the tasks were
passed overall. The observed distribution was found to be sig-
nificantly  different  from  the distribution  expected  by chance
(withapassrateof55%),x2(4,Ar=68)=  155,p< .001. Thus,
children were not simply guessing on false belief tasks.

Ninety-seven percent of control tasks were passed by the chil-
dren. This indicates that children  were able to remember the
facts of the stories that were read to them, (e.g., where the ball
was at first, where it was moved to, etc.). Given that virtually all
control questions were passed this was not entered as a covariate
in any analyses. In preliminary analyses we examined the effect
of sex on false  belief  understanding,  general  language ability,
and verbal and nonverbal memory. Sex of the child was not sig-
nificantly associated with any variables and was not entered in
any subsequent analyses.

To examine whether any one task was harder than  another,
we carried out three multivariate repeated measures analyses of
variance with general language ability, nonverbal memory and
age as the between-subjects  variable in each analysis, and the
four false belief tasks as the within-subjects variable. Pillais F is
reported for all analyses. A median split was carried out to cre-
ate a high and low category for general language ability, nonver-
bal memory and age. If one task was harder than  another, we
would expect a main effect  for task. If one task  required more
language, memory or greater age than  another then we would
expect  a significant  interaction  between  the between-subjects
variable (language, nonverbal memory or age) and the within-
subjects  variable  (false  belief  task).  When  general  language
ability was the between-subjects  variable, the main  effect  for
task was not significant, ^(3,64)  = 1.62,p< .19. The interac-
tion between language and task was not significant, F(3, 64) =
.61, p < .63). When nonverbal memory was the between-sub-
jects variable, the main effect  for task was not significant, _F(3,
64) =  1.66, p <  .19. There was no significant  interaction be-
tween  nonverbal  memory and task, F(3, 64) =  .93, p  <  .42.
When age was the between-subjects variable, the main effect for
task was not significant, F{3, 64) = 1.58,p< .20. There was no
significant interaction between age and task: F( 3, 64) = 2.09, p
<  . 11. Consequently, there was no evidence that one task was
more  difficult  than  another,  and  no  evidence  that  one task
needed  higher levels of general  language  ability  or  nonverbal
memory capacity in order to pass it. Similarly, no one task was
passed at an earlier age than another task.

In this study our intention was to use a summed measure of
the false belief scores as the outcome variable. We can only ar-
gue that some common underlying skill is being measured, and
that this is reflected in a measure which is a summation of four
tasks, if the intercorrelation  between different  tasks is strong.
When these four tasks are summed the internal consistency of
the measure is high (a = .85). The total score on all four  false

Table I
Means and Standard Deviations of Age, False Belief
Understanding, Language, Memory, and Family
Structure Variables (N = 68)

Variable

Age
False belief understanding
General language ability (Test of Early

Language Development)

Verbal memory
Nonverbal memory
Family size
Birth order

M

49.20
2.21

19.72
17.25
11.51
1.90
1.54

SD

7.80
1.65

7.28
4.10
4.11
0.76
0.70

belief tasks is the measure  used  throughout the remainder of
this article. The mean and standard deviation for this total false
belief score, and for general  language ability,  verbal  memory,
nonverbal memory, family size, birth order, and age can be seen
in Table 1.

Relationship  Between  False Belief  Understanding, Age,
and  Cognitive  Abilities

Our first aim was to examine the cognitive abilities associated
with  false  belief  understanding.  We  wanted  to  determine
whether the language or memory measures account for variance
in false belief understanding after  the effects  of age have been
partialled out.

Table 2 gives the Pearson product  moment correlations be-
tween the false belief test score, age, the measure of general lan-
guage  ability  (TELD),  verbal  memory,  nonverbal  memory,
family size, and birth order. Only 1 child had three siblings, and
all of them were older. In order that this child did not influence
the results for both family size and birth order unduly, her fam-
ily size and birth order were both rescaled to 3. Analyses were
run with the rescaled variables and the raw score variables, and
there was little  difference  in the results. The results with the
rescaled variables are presented. Results related to family size
and birth  order are discussed  later in this article. False belief
understanding was found to be significantly associated with age,
general language ability, verbal memory, and nonverbal mem-
ory. Given the established  correlation  of these variables with
age, it was important to determine whether these language and
cognitive measures remained associated with false belief under-
standing after taking account of the effects of age. In order to do
this partial correlations were carried out. Results of this analysis
can be seen in the lower half of Table 2. After the variance in
false belief understanding that is attributable to age is taken into
account,  general  language ability  and verbal  memory  remain
significantly associated with false belief understanding, but non-
verbal memory does not.

General  language  ability  and the verbal  memory  measure
show similarly strong relationships with false belief understand-
ing. Hierarchical multiple regression analysis was used to deter-
mine whether these two different types of language measure ex-
plained unique variance in false belief understanding after the
effect  of age was partialled out. In the first analysis with  false

THEORY  OF  MIND  DEVELOPMENT

73

Table 2
Pearson Correlations of False Belief Understanding, Age, General Language Ability,  Verbal
Memory, Nonverbal Memory, Family Size, and Birth Order (N= 68)

Variable

False belief

understanding

Age

General
language
ability

Verbal
memory

Nonverbal
memory

Family

size

Age
General language ability
Verbal  memory
Nonverbal  memory
Family size
Birth order

.64***
.64***
.61***
,49***
.46***
.30*

.69***
.65***
.60***
.17
.22

.76***
.60*M
.27*
.23

.55***
.21
.20

Partial correlation after effect of age is partialled out

.21
.11

.76***

General language ability
Verbal memory
Nonverbal  memory

.35**
.33**
.18

*p<m.  ***p<.oo\.

belief understanding as the criterion  variable, age was entered
first, followed  by the measure of general language ability, fol-
lowed by the measure of verbal memory. The measure of gen-
eral language ability accounted for a further 7% of the variance
in false belief understanding after age had been entered into the
regression first, but verbal  memory  did not account  for any
unique variance after  age and general  language had been en-
tered. When the language variables were entered in the opposite
order, with  verbal  memory  being entered  before  general lan-
guage ability, verbal memory accounted for 6.5% ofthe variance
in false belief understanding after age had been entered, but gen-
eral language ability did not predict any further variance. Thus,
just one ofthe  language measures is sufficient  to take account
ofthe effects of language on false belief understanding.

Saying that language accounts for 7% ofthe  variance in false
belief test scores, underestimates the real relationship between
false belief understanding and language ability. As age and lan-
guage strongly co-vary, r(68) =  .69, much  ofthe  variance in
false  belief  understanding  accounted  for by age will  also be
shared by language. By putting age into the regression first, the
shared variance will be taken up by age. If, on the other hand,
we enter general language ability into the regression first, it ac-
counts for 41% ofthe  variance in false belief understanding. A
further  8% of the variance in false belief understanding is ac-
counted for by adding age into the equation.

In order to determine whether there was a threshold of lan-
guage ability necessary for passing false belief tasks, we plotted
language scores against false belief scores. The scatterplot can
be seen in Figure  1. A sharp threshold can be seen in this plot.
For children who passed one or more false belief tasks, 49 out
of 50 children (98%) had a general language score of 14 or over.
For those children who did not pass any tasks, 67% (12 out of
18) had a general language score under  14 with a further 33%
(n = 6) scoring over  14. A chi-square analysis was carried out
to determine whether children above this threshold were more
likely to pass false belief tasks than children below this language
threshold. The chi-square was highly significant,  %2(UN=6S)
=  35.7, p  <  .0001,  demonstrating  that  children  above  this

threshold were much more likely to pass false belief tasks than
children below the threshold.

To examine  whether  language  ability  was associated  with
false belief understanding once this threshold was reached, we
calculated  the correlation  between  false  belief  understanding
and language only on those children who were above the thresh-
old on language. Language remained associated with false belief
understanding, r(55) = .49, p<  .001, in this group of children,
although it fell just below significance  once age was partialled
out, r = .20, p < .07. These data demonstrate that children do
need a certain level of language ability to pass the false belief
tasks, but a weak association between language and false belief
understanding is evident even after this threshold is reached. By
carrying out this partial correlation only on children who have
reached a certain level of language ability we reduce the range
on the language variable, making it less likely that a significant
correlation will be evident. The fact  that  a weak  relationship
between language ability and false belief understanding is pres-
ent under these conditions, suggests that the link between the
two is more fundamental than that of a performance constraint.

Relationship Between False Belief Understanding, Age,
Language Ability, Birth Order, and Family Size

Our  second aim was to determine  whether the association
between children's false belief  understanding and their  family
size, recently reported by Perner et al. (1994), can be explained
by the linguistic abilities of the children. Correlations between
these variables can be seen in Table 2. Family size is positively
related to false belief understanding and weakly, but also posi-
tively, to language  ability.  Children  with  more  siblings show
higher levels of false belief  understanding and higher levels of
general language ability. The question that we were interested in
answering was whether family size was significantly  associated
with  false  belief  understanding  after  taking into  account the
children's age and language ability. Given the pattern of corre-
lation of these variables it is possible that the univariate rela-
tionship between false belief understanding and family size can

74

JENKINS  AND  ASTINGTON

35 +

30 +

25 +

20 +

15 +

10 +

5 +

0 +

Figure 1.  Plot of scores (68 cases plotted) on Test of Early Language Development (TELD) with scores
on false belief test. Numbers on the scatterplot refer to the number of cases sharing the same values.

False  Belief

be accounted  for  by linguistic ability. Given  that  birth  order  is
also positively associated with family size and to a small degree,
language ability, it is important  to control  for  this effect  before
entering  family  size into the regression.  In order to  determine
whether family size is associated with false belief understanding
after  accounting  for  age,  language  ability,  and  birth  order  we
carried  out a hierarchical  multiple regression. Age was entered
into the regression first, language ability second, birth order was
entered third, and family size last.

The results of this analysis can be seen in Table 3. After  Step
4 when all independent variables were in the equation,  multiple
R  =  .77, F(4,63)  = 23.5, p< .001. After Step  1  with age in the
equation,  R2  =  .41, F ( l,  66)  = 46.4, p < .001. After  Step 2
with  age  and  language  in  the  equation,  there  was a significant
increase in R2,R2  = .49, Fiac(  1,65)  -  9.3,p <  .003. After  Step
3 when birth order was entered  into the equation, there was no
significant  increase in R2. After Step 4 with age, language, birth
order, and family  size in the equation, there was again a signifi-
cant  increase in R2, R2 = .60,  Finc(  1, 63)  =  15.2, p <  .001.
Family size is a significant  predictor  of false belief  understand-
ing, after  the effects  of age and  language  ability  have been  par-
tialled out, but birth order is not.

We examined  whether the  effect  of family  size is stronger  in
children who are less linguistically  advanced  or  younger.  A hi-

erarchical regression analysis was carried out with variables be-
ing  entered  in the  following  order:  age,  language,  family  size,
and the interaction  terms: Family Size X Language and  Family
Size X Age. With age, language, and family size in the  equation
R2  =  .58.  The  Family  Size  X  Language  interaction  term  in-
creased-/?2 to .61, which was a significant increase in R2,  Finc(  1,
63) =  5.0, p < .03. On the last step when Family Size X Age was
entered  into  the equation,  there  was no  significant  increase  in
R\  Fi n c(l,62)  = 0.01, p<.  93.

To illustrate  the  meaning  of  the  interaction  between  family
size and language ability, we carried  out a  median  split on  lan-
guage ability to create groups of children with higher and lower
linguistic  abilities.  The  means  for  total  false  belief  score  as a
function  of language ability and family size are as follows for the
low language group: no  sibs(/i  = 13) M—  0.31,  1  sib (n  =  15)
M  =  1.4,  2 sibs (n  = 4) M = 3.2. The means  for  children  with
high  language  ability  are: no  sibs (n  = 9) M =  2.9,  1 sib (n  —
17) M =  2.9,2  sibs (n  =  10) M = 3.6. The presence  of siblings
is  more  strongly  associated  with  false  belief  understanding in
children with  lower levels of language ability, than it is in chil-
dren with higher levels of language ability.

One  might  expect  that  older  siblings  would  have a  greater
effect  on  the  development  of false  belief  understanding  than
younger  siblings.  Perner  et al.  (1994)  found  a  nonsignificant

THEORY  OF MIND  DEVELOPMENT

75

Table 3
Summary of Hierarchical Regression Analysis Examining the
Predictors of False Belief Understanding (N = 68)

Step/variable

B

SEB

Stepl
Age
Step 2
Age
Language

Step 3
Age
Language
Birth order

Step 4
Age
Language
Birth order
Family size

.14

.08
.08

.08
.08
.33

.09
.06
-.58
1.11

.02

.03
.03

.03
.03
.23

.02
.03
.31
.29

**p<.0\.  ***p<.00\.

0

.64

.39
.37

.37
.35
.13

.42
.27
-.23
.49

Change in

R2

.41***

.07**

.02

.10***

trend in this direction, and noted that in Light's (1979) study,
children with older siblings performed  significantly  better on a
role-taking task than did those with younger siblings. However,
in the present study the lack of effect of the birth-order variable,
once age and language ability are controlled for, suggests that it
does not matter whether siblings are older or younger than the
target child. In order to confirm  this, we examined false belief
scores in children  with only one sibling. Sixteen children had
an older sibling and  16 children  had a younger sibling. Sibling
position was entered  into an analysis of covariance, with  false
belief as the outcome variable, and controlling for the effect of
age prior to examining the main effect  of sibling position. Sib-
ling position  was not found to be associated with  false belief,
F(\,  30) =  .94, ns. We also examined  whether the sibling's
closeness in age to the target child  was related to false  belief
understanding. The age difference  between the target child and
his or her sibling was calculated and the correlation  between
this variable and false belief understanding was not found to be
significant r{ 3 2) = - .09. Thus, it is the number of siblings that
the child has that is important for the development of false belief
understanding  rather than  whether  these siblings are older or
younger and how far distant in age they are.

Discussion

Our data suggest that children's ability to perform false belief
tasks develops gradually  in the preschool  years. This may be
because the representational  system on which false belief un-
derstanding depends, develops gradually during the preschool
period (Plaut & Karmiloff-Smith,  1993) or because increasing
performance  capacity  enables the child to display  preexisting
competence.  Our false  belief  measure  comprises  well-estab-
lished tasks used in many studies examining the development of
false belief understanding. The focus of interest in most of these
studies has been on age differences in children's acquisition of
false belief understanding, and researchers have described this

acquisition as if it were an all or none phenomenon, or at least
dependent on some ordering of task difficulty. Indeed, studies in
this area frequently assess false belief understanding using a sin-
gle task.  Applying an individual  differences  framework  using
multiple false belief tasks allows us to look at children's pattern
of acquisition. Given that there was no evidence that any one
task was more difficult than the others, and that about a third of
the sample did not just  fail all tests or pass all tests, it would
appear that the acquisition of skill is more gradual, and that at
some point children may show partial or insecure understand-
ing, which is independent  of any ordering of difficulty  within
tasks.

False belief understanding was found  to be associated  with
general language ability, after  the effects  of age had been par-
tialled  out.  Using a standardized  measure of language ability,
98%  of children  who passed  one or more  false  belief  tasks
showed a level of linguistic ability equivalent to a child of age 4
years-1 month or higher (Hresko et al.,  1981). Moreover, lan-
guage and false  belief understanding were still significantly as-
sociated  with one another  among this group of children who
had  achieved  the language  threshold  for passing  false  belief
tasks.

As expected,  age and general  language  ability  strongly co-
vary, and much of the variance in false belief understanding ex-
plained  by these  variables is shared  between  both  variables.
General language ability accounted for 41% of the variance in
false belief understanding, before age was entered into the equa-
tion. Even  after  all the variance attributable  to age has been
accounted  for,  language  ability  still  predicts  a  significant
amount of variance in false belief understanding.

There are several possible explanations for the relationship
between  language  ability  and false  belief  understanding. One
possibility is that standard methods of measuring children's un-
derstanding of false  belief rely heavily on children's  linguistic
abilities. In the standard tasks children have to listen to a story
or to the experimenter's talk about  some task materials, com-
prehend this input, process the experimenter's questions about
it, and make some response. Children may understand false be-
lief but,  because of the  linguistic complexity  of the  tasks, be
unable  to  demonstrate  their  understanding  in  this  context.
From  this  point  of view, the children's linguistic  immaturity
results in task performance that masks their underlying compe-
tence. Two questions arise  here: one is whether  performance
constraints do in fact operate in the demonstration of false belief
understanding, and the other is whether underlying competence
could be demonstrated if the performance constraints were re-
moved. The present data speak to the first question and do sug-
gest that children need a certain level of linguistic ability across
tasks to be able to pass false belief tasks. Our data do not speak
to the issue of whether competence can be demonstrated once
performance  constraints are lessened, although other people's
data suggest that this is so (Freeman et al., 1991).

However, the fact  that language ability and false belief un-
derstanding  remain  linked,  although  weakly  so, in  children
who have passed the threshold necessary for passing one task,
suggests that  there is a more  fundamental  relation  between
false belief understanding and language. This alternative view
is that linguistic capacity is intrinsically  linked to false belief
understanding,  not because  linguistic  skills are required to

76

JENKINS  AND  ASTINGTON

carry  out  false belief tasks, but  because theory of  mind  devel-
opment  and  language  development  are  fundamentally  related
and  interdependent.

An  important  issue  concerns  the aspects of language  impli-
cated in this relation. Regarding syntax, Feldman (1988) argues
that  the  ability  to  reflect  on  thoughts,  essential  for  false  belief
understanding, depends on the development  of recursive ability,
that  is, the  syntactic  ability  of  turning  comments  into  topics.
Further, de Villiers (1995) has shown that children's mastery of
the syntax  of complementation  is related to their  performance
on false belief tasks. Regarding semantic aspects, Olson  (1988)
claims that theory of mind development is dependent on acquir-
ing a metalanguage, that is, a language for talking about  mental
states.  During  the  preschool  years  children  acquire  semantic
terms, such as think  and know, to refer to the propositional atti-
tude of mental  states. As mentioned  earlier, children's  compre-
hension  of such  terms is related  to  their  performance  on  false
belief tasks (Moore et al.,  1990). Regarding pragmatics, Baron-
Cohen  (1988)  links the  social  deficits  of children  with  autism
to their difficulties  with language, particularly the pragmatic as-
pects  of  communication.  And  indeed,  autistic  children's  false
belief task performance  is related to their score on a test of prag-
matic ability (Eisenmajer  & Prior,  1991).

In future work it will be important to refine the  measurement
of  language  competence.  We  need  to  find  out  which  of  these
aspects of linguistic functioning  is most strongly related to the-
ory of mind development: the syntactic abilities shown in  recur-
sion and complementation, the semantic development shown in
the acquisition of metarepresentational  terms, or the pragmatic
abilities shown in  communication.

Some investigators have stressed the need to differentiate  be-
tween issues of competence  and  performance  in children's  un-
derstanding  of  mind  (Fodor,  1992; Freeman,  1994).  There  is
more than  one way in which  competence can  be defined  in re-
lation  to  theory  of  mind.  For  instance,  Leslie  (1991;  Leslie  &
Roth,  1993)  suggests that  theory  of  mind  abilities  depend  on
the development  of an innate theory of mind  module.  Presum-
ably he would explain associations with language such as we see
in these data by the way in which language affects  performance.
Leslie's  emphasis  on  innateness  and  modularity  constitute  a
view  similar  to  Fodor's (1983,  1987,  1992).  However,  there  is
another  way of conceptualizing  competence,  in  which  the  rep-
resentational  architecture  itself  actually  undergoes  develop-
ment  (Karmiloff-Smith,  1992).  In  this  view,  the  representa-
tional  structures  underlying  false  belief  understanding  and  its
linguistic  expression  develop  over  time,  rather  than  the  child
gaining better access to preexisting structures.

These different  notions of competence  lead to different  inter-
pretations of our data. For instance, many children show under-
standing on one task but  not another, even though  one task was
not found  to be more difficult  than  another across all  children.
If we adopt  an  innate  modular  notion  of  competence,  we can
interpret  this finding to mean that  performance  factors  operate
within individuals in complex ways. A child has the competence
to pass false belief tasks, but because of aspects of the task  that
are  difficult  for  the  child  in  idiosyncratic  ways,  one  task  is
passed  but  another  is  failed.  We  stress  the  notion  "idiosyn-
cratic"  here  because  we  did  not  find  that  one  task  was  more
difficult  than  another  overall,  or  that  language  or  memory  de-

mands  were  higher  for  one task  rather  than  another.  Adopting
the  alternative  view  (Karmiloff-Smith,  1992)  that  stresses  the
development of competence over time, leads to a different  inter-
pretation  of our data. Children show an insecure  understanding
of false  belief when  they first begin to understand  it. This is be-
cause  the  symbolic  representations  that  they  are  relying on  to
pass the tasks are not sufficiently  established. Consequently they
are easily overwhelmed  by experience-based  perceptions  (Plaut
&  Karmiloff-Smith,  1993).  Children's  performance  becomes
more  reliable  as the  underlying  competence  becomes  more se-
curely  established.

There was no evidence to support the hypothesis that the ac-
quisition  of  false  belief  understanding  is  mainly  a  function  of
increased  memory  capacity.  Verbal  memory  was  associated
with  false  belief understanding  after  taking account  of age, but
it did not account  for more  variance in false belief  understand-
ing than  a  more  general  language  measure  did. Our  nonverbal
memory  measure  was  not  associated  with  false  belief  under-
standing after  taking account  of age. Although it might perhaps
be possible to demonstrate an  association using a more  refined
memory  measure,  the present  data  do  not  support  the sugges-
tion that children's ability to pass false belief tasks is dependent
on their memory  capacity.

In this study we confirmed  Perner et al.'s {1994)  finding  that
there  is a  positive  relation  between  children's  performance  on
false  belief tests and  the  number  of siblings they  have. We also
found,  as did  Perner  et al., that  it does not  matter  whether  the
target children are older or younger than their siblings, nor how
close in age they are to their siblings. More important, our study
demonstrates that the relationship between family size and  false
belief  understanding  is not  accounted  for  by  language  ability.
We also found  an  interaction  between  family  size and  language
ability. Family size has a very small effect  on  false belief  under-
standing  when  children's  language ability  is high, and  a  strong
association with performance  when language ability is low.

It may be somewhat surprising that family  size is positively re-
lated to  increased  false  belief understanding,  as studies of  family
size and  intellectual  development  suggest  that  IQ is inversely  re-
lated to family size (Zajonc & Markus,  1975). However, this is the
case  for  children  in  large  families  of  four  or  more.  Zajonc  and
Markus's  recalculation  of  Belmont  and  Marolla's  (1973)  data
shows that in families with two or three children, first- and second-
borns  have  higher  IQs than  only  children.  Moreover,  false  belief
understanding  is not  simply  a  proxy  measure  for  IQ. Two skills
typically  measured  in  IQ  tests were assessed  in  this study.  False
belief  understanding  was weakly  associated  with  one  (nonverbal
memory) and more strongly associated with the other (general lan-
guage ability).  However, these  two  measures explained  less than
50% of the variance in false belief understanding.

How  might  the  presence  of more  siblings  in  the  home  posi-
tively affect  the child's acquisition  of false belief  understanding?
One explanation  for this finding is that a greater number of sib-
lings in the home allows for an increased number of interactions
in  which  the  effect  of  beliefs  on  behavior  is evident.  Such  in-
teractions  might include one person teasing or tricking  another,
one person  showing surprise when a belief turns out to be  false,
as well  as  mistaken  actions  based  on  false  belief.  Dunn  et  al.
(1991)  found  that aspects of mother-sibling and  sibling-sibling
interaction when the target child was 2 years 9 months predicted

THEORY  OF  MIND  DEVELOPMENT

77

false  belief  understanding  when  the  target  child  was  3  years  4
months. Specifically, the extent to which the target child and older
sibling cooperated in play and the extent to which the mother con-
trolled the sibling, related to the child's understanding of false be-
lief. Thus, it is likely that the  understanding of false belief is fos-
tered  by  interactions  that  the  child  observes  as well  as those  in
which he or she takes part. It is unlikely, however, to be just simply
exposure  to  other  children  that  has the  important  effect,  as  the
majority  of the children in this study were with other children  for
much of the day in the nursery and daycare setting.

The intimacy  of the sibling relationship  may allow for a spe-
cific  kind  of learning  that  facilitates  the  acquisition  of  an  inti-
mate kind of knowledge: the understanding of another  person's
beliefs.  Azmitia  and  Hesser  (1993)  have  shown  how  familiar
older  children  and  older  siblings  differ  in  the  instructional
effects that they have when playing with younger children.  Dur-
ing  an  unstructured  building  task  7-year-old  children  were
more  likely to imitate  and  consult  their older  sibling and  their
performance  at  the  end  of the task  was better  than  when  they
were working with an older friend.  Duringa structured  teaching
session  the older siblings were  more  likely  to  provide  guidance
spontaneously,  and  give  more  explanations  than  the  older
friend.  The  younger  children  were  also  more  likely  to  prompt
their  siblings* explanations.  These  results  suggest  a  complex
scaffolding  process whereby the familiarity  and intimacy  of the
sibling relationship facilitates the learning process. The present
study involves children younger than  7 years, and the finding in
relation  to  family  size  is  not  confined  to  children  with  older
siblings. However, the opportunity to learn  about the nature of
beliefs may be provided by intimate relationships with  younger
as well as older siblings.

In  explaining  the  interaction  between  language  and  family
size several interesting possibilities emerge. Children  can  get to
an understanding of false belief through the presence of siblings
when their language abilities are poor, suggesting that either per-
formance  or competence  in  this domain  does not  rely  entirely
on language. Within a performance  explanation  of the develop-
ment  of  false  belief  understanding,  this  would  mean  that  in-
teraction with siblings fosters children's abilities to demonstrate
their competence. The implication  for a developmental  view of
competence  is that  the  representational  system  implicated  in
false belief understanding is more than  linguistic.

In conclusion, we have shown  that false belief  understanding
is strongly  associated  with general linguistic ability  and  argued
that theory of mind and language do not develop independently
of one another. However, the fact  that  number of siblings is re-
lated  to the acquisition  of false  belief understanding,  especially
for  children  with  less linguistic  ability; suggests that  children's
theory of mind  is more than a linguistic skill.

References

Astington, J. W. (1993). The child's discovery of the mind. Cambridge,

MA: Harvard University Press.

Astington, J.  W., & Gopnik,  A. (1991).  Theoretical  explanations of
children's understanding of the mind. British Journal of Developmen-
tal Psychology, 9, 7-31.

Azmitia, M., & Hesser, J. (1993). Why siblings are important  agents
of cognitive development: A comparison of siblings and peers. Child
Development, 64, 430-444.

Baron-Cohen, S. (1988). Social and pragmatic deficits in autism: Cog-

nitive or affective?  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
75,379-401.

Belmont, L., & Marolla, F. A. (1973, December 14). Birth order, family

size, and intelligence. Science,  182,  1096-1101.

Case, R. (1989, April). A neo-Piagetian analysis of the child's  under-
standing of other people,  and the internal conditions which  motivate
their behavior. Paper presented at the Biennial Meeting of the Society
for Research in Child Development, Kansas City, MO.

Chandler, M. J., Fritz, A. S., & Hala, S. M. (1989). Small scale deceit:
Deception  as a  marker  of 2-,  3- and  4-year-olds' early  theories of
mind. Child Development, 60, 1263-1277.

de Villiers, J. G. (1995, March). Steps in the mastery of sentence com-
plements.  Paper presented at the Biennial Meeting of the Society for
Research in Child Development, Indianapolis, IN.

Dunn,  J.,  Brown,  J.,  Slomkowski,  C,  Tesla,  C,  &  \bungblade,  L.
(1991). \bung children's understanding of other people's feelings and
beliefs: Individual differences  and their antecedents. Child Develop-
ment, 62, 1352-1366.

Eisenmajer,  R., & Prior, M. (1991). Cognitive linguistic correlates of
"theory of mind" ability in autistic children. British Journal of De-
velopmental Psychology, 9,  351-364.

Feldman, C. F. {1988). Early forms of thought about thoughts: Some
simple linguistic expressions of mental state. In J. W. Astington, P. L.
Harris, & D. R. Olson (Eds.), Developing theories of mind (pp.  126-
137). New \brk: Cambridge University Press.

Fodor, J. A. (1983).  The modularity of mind.  Cambridge, MA: MIT

Press.

Fodor, J. A. (1987). Psychosemantics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1992). A theory of the child's theory of mind. Cognition,

44, 283-296.

Freeman,  N. H. (1994). Associations and dissociations in theories of

mind. In C. Lewis & P. Mitchell (Eds.), Children's early understand-
ingofmind(pp.  95-111). Hove, England: Erlbaum.

Freeman,  N. H.,  Lewis, C,  & Doherty, M. J.  (1991).  Preschoolers'
grasp of a desire for  knowledge in  false-belief  prediction:  Practical
intelligence and verbal report. British Journal of Developmental Psy-
chology,9,  139-157.

Frith, U. (1989). Autism: Explaining the enigma. Oxford, England: Ba-

sil Blackwell.

Frye, D., Zelazo, P. D., & Palfai, T. (1992). The cognitive basis of theory

of mind. Unpublished manuscript, New York University.

Gopnik,  A.. & Astington, J.  W. (1988). Children's understanding of
representational change and its relation to the understanding of false
belief and the appearance-reality distinction. Child Development, 58,
26-37.

Hresko, W. P., Reid, D. K., & Hammill, D. D. (1981). The Test of Early

Language Development (TELD).  Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Karmiloff-Smith,  A. (1992). Beyond modularity: A developmental per-

spective on cognitive science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Leslie, A. M. (1991). The theory of mind impairment in autism: Evi-
dence for a modular mechanism of development? In A. Whiten (Ed.),
Natural theories of mind: Evolution,  development and simulation of
everyday  mindreading  (pp.  63-78).  Oxford,  England:  Basil
Blackwell.

Leslie, A., & Roth, D. (1993). What autism teaches us about metarep-
resentation.  In  S.  Baron-Cohen,  H.  Tager-Flusberg,  &  D.  Cohen
(Eds.),  Understanding  other minds: Perspectives from  autism (pp.
83-111). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.

Light, P. (1979). The development of social sensitivity Cambridge, En-

gland: Cambridge University Press.

Moore, C, Pure, K.., & Furrow, D. (1990). Children's understanding of
the  modal expressions of speaker certainty and  uncertainty  and its

78

JENKJNS  AND  ASTINGTON

relation  to  the  development  of  a  representational  theory  of  mind.
Child Development, 61, 722-730.

Olson,  D.  R.  (1988).  On  the  origins  of  beliefs  and  other  intentional
states  in  children.  In  J.  W. Astington,  P.  L.  Harris,  &  D.  R.  Olson
(Eds.), Developing theories  of mind  (pp.  414-426).  New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Olson, D. R. (1993). The development  of representations: The  origins

of mental life. Canadian  Psychology, 34,  1-14.

Perner,  J.,  Leekam,  S.,  & Wimmer,  H.  (1987).  Three-year-olds'  diffi-
culty with false belief: The case for a conceptual deficit. British  Jour-
nal of Developmental  Psychology, 5.  125-137.

Perner,  J.,  Ruffman,  T,  &  Leekam,  S.  R.  (1994).  Theory  of  mind  is
contagious:  You  catch  it  from  your  sibs.  Child  Development,  65,
1228-1238.

Plaut, D. C,  & Karmiloff-Smith,  A. (1993). Representational develop-
ment  and theory-of-mind  computations.  Behavioral  and  Brain  Sci-
ences, 16, 70-71.

Siegal,  M.,  &  Beattie,  K.  (1991).  Where  to  look  first  for  children's

knowledge of false belief. Cognition,  38,  1-12.

Tager-Flusberg,  H.  (1993).  What  language  reveals  about  the  under-
standing  of  minds  in  children  with  autism.  In  S.  Baron-Cohen,  H.
Tager-Flusberg, & D. Cohen (Eds.),  Understanding  other minds: Per-
spectives from  autism  (pp.  138-157). Oxford,  England: Oxford  Uni-
versity Press.

Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:  Representation
and constraining function  of wrong beliefs in young children's under-
standing of deception. Cognition,  13,  103-128.

Zajonc,  R.  B., &  Markus,  G.  B. (1975).  Birth  order  and  intellectual

development.  Psychological Review, 82,  74-88.

Received October 7,  ] 994
Revision received April  17,1995

Accepted April  17,  1995  •

Low Publication Prices for APA Members and Affiliates

Keeping you up-to-date. All APA Fellows, Members, Associates, and Student Affiliates
receive—as part of their annual dues—subscriptions to theAmerican  Psychologist  andAPA
Monitor. High School Teacher and International Affiliates receive subscriptions to the APA
Monitor,  and they may subscribe to the American  Psychologist at a significantly  reduced
rate. In addition, all Members and Student Affiliates  are eligible for savings of up to 60%
(plus  a journal  credit)  on  all  other  APA journals,  as  well  as  significant  discounts  on
subscriptions from cooperating societies and publishers (e.g., the American Association for
Counseling and Development, Academic Press, and Human Sciences Press).

Essential  resources.  APA members and affiliates receive special rates for purchases of
APA books, including the Publication Manual of the American Psychological  Association,
and on dozens of new topical books each year.

Other  benefits  of  membership.  Membership  in  APA  also  provides  eligibility  for
competitive insuranceplans, continuing education programs, reduced APAconvention fees,
and specialty divisions.

More information. Write to American Psychological Association, Membership Services,
750 First Street, NE, Washington, DC 20002-4242.

