Early Child Development and Care

ISSN: 0300-4430 (Print) 1476-8275 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gecd20

Relationships among measures of social cognition
and measures of social skill

Dona M. Kagan & Bonnie G Kolowski

To cite this article: Dona M. Kagan & Bonnie G Kolowski (1988) Relationships among measures
of social cognition and measures of social skill, Early Child Development and Care, 37:1, 163-173,
DOI: 10.1080/0300443880370112
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/0300443880370112

Published online: 07 Jul 2006.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 17

View related articles 

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gecd20

Early  Child Development and Care,
1988, Vol. 37, pp.  163-173
Photocopying permitted  by licence only
Reprints available directly from  the publisher

©  1988 Gordon  and  Breach
Science Publishers, Inc.
Printed in Great  Britain

Relationships  among  measures  of  social
cognition and measures of social skill

DONA  M. KAGAN
Associate Professor of  Teacher Education,  California State  University,
San Bernardino
and

BONNIE G KOLOWSKI
Mi/lard Public Schools, Omaha, Nebraska

(Received  1 January  1988)

This study was designed to examine relationships  among measures of
social  cognition,  social  competence,  and  actual  social  behaviors  ob-
served naturalistically. Subjects were twenty-three kindergarteners who
completed  standardized  tests of  social cognition  and mental  maturity.
Teacher  ratings  and ratings  of  peer  popularity  were  also obtained  for
each child. The children  were then observed over  a 90-day  period, as
they worked together  in small groups on tasks assigned by the teacher.
The  only  kind  of  observed  social  behavior  significantly  related  to
performance on the test of social cognition was negative or aggressive
comments,  suggesting  that  more  socially  sophisticated  children  may
have  perceived  social  interactions  as  opportunities  to  manipulate  or
control their peers. Rating scales completed by the teacher emerged as
the most accurate gauges of observed social behaviors.

THE  ability  to  perceive  and  to  interpret  interpersonal  stimuli
accurately is essential for effective  social performance  (Morrison  and
Bellack,  1981).  Adequate  social  performance  requires  not  only  a
repertoire of appropriate social responses, but knowledge about when
and  how  these  responses  should  be  applied.  Application  of  this
knowledge  depends, in part,  upon  one's  ability  to "read"  the social
environment:  the ability  to understand  the  emotions  and  intentions
guiding  the  behaviors  of  others  (Asher  and  Renshaw,  1981).  It  is
likely that many children who have chronic problems relating to their
peers may simply not know how to act in particular social situations
(Asher and  Renshaw,  1981). Thus, researchers draw  the  distinction
between  social  knowledge,  or  social  "cognition",  and  social  per-
formance.

163

164 

D. M. KAGAN AND  B. G. KOLOWSKI

Researchers have defined  social cognition in a variety of ways: the
ability to perceive and decode the behaviors, feelings, and  motives of
others;  to  empathize;  to  assume  another's  point  of  view  (Shantz,
1975).  The  definition  used  in  this  study  was  the  ability  to  decide
nonverbal social cues.

In addition  to social cognition and social performance,  researchers
distinguish  social  "competence",  an  evaluative  term  for  behaviors
that  are  strongly  related  to  valuable  social  outcomes  (Gresham,
1986). Behavior  that is socially competent in one situation or for one
particular  individual  may  not  be  competent  for  others  or  for  other
situations.  In  the context  of an  elementary  classroom,  three  criteria
have  been  identified  traditionally  as  valuable  social  outcomes:  (a)
peer  acceptance  (Gronlund  and  Anderson,  1963; Kohn,  1977);  (b)
favorable  teacher ratings of student  behavior  (Brophy,  1981; Green,
Forehand,  Beck  and  Vosk,  1980);  and  (c)  academic  achievement.
Although  these  three  factors  have  been  shown  to  be  significantly
interrelated,  measures  of social  cognition  have  never  been  studied
simultaneously  (Coie,  Dodge  and  Coppotelli,  1982;  Dodge,  1983;
Gottman  el al., 1975, Green et al., 1980).

The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  examine  relationships  among
measures  of  social  cognition,  the  criteria  listed  above,  and  actual
social  behaviors  observed  naturalistically.  Significant  correlations
between measures of social cognition and  actual classroom  behaviors
would  testify  to  the  ecological  validity  of  the  construct,  an  issue
generally  ignored  by  researchers,  since  "tests"  of  social  cognition
almost always consist of artificial  experimental  tasks  (Shantz.  1975).

METHOD

Subjects

Subjects  were  twenty-three  children  who  had  completed  the  first
semester of kindergarten:  thirteen  boys, ten girls. Their  teacher  had
over ten years of experience with kindergarten children. The children
were tested  and  observed  over a ninety-day  period.

Instruments

Two standardized  tests were administered  to the children:

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL SKILL 

165

Cognitive achievement.  The Boehm Test of Basic Concepts  (Applica-

tions)  was  used  to  assess  general  cognitive  achievement  (Boehm,
1983). This form  of the Boehm  (split-half reliability = -76)  evaluates
children's  ability  to use basic concepts in  combination,  particularly
the ability to: sequence events, identify  similarity, determine  orders,
take the perspective of another. Psychometric studies suggest that two
fundamental  factors underlie the items: language comprehension  and
the ability to deal with  topological space  (Boehm,  1983).

Social cognition.  The  Test  of Social  Inference  (Edmonson,  dejung,

Leland, and Leach,  1974) is an achievement  test assessing the ability
to decode visual social  cues. It  consists of a set of pictures  of diverse
social  situations.  The  examiner  asks  a  subject  probing  questions
according  to  a  standard  script.  Responses  are  classified  as  either
"creditable  inferences"  or  "nonscorable  responses". An  inference  is
defined as an inductive leap from cues visible in a picture to what they
most  reasonably  imply.  Although  subjects  provide  open-ended
responses, an explicit set of possible responses is provided  for scoring
purposes,  each  possible  response  classified  as  either  creditable  or
nonscorable. Subjects' scores consist of the total number of creditable
inferences  elicited.  Form  C-14  was  used  here  (interrater  relatibility
= •90), which  has  been  shown  to correlate  with  other  tests of social
cognition, age, aptitude, and  teacher ratings. Scores on this test have
never  been  examined  in relation  to actual  social behaviors  observed
naturalistically.

The  kindergarten  teacher  completed  three  different  instruments
designed to evaluate students' social behaviors in the classroom. One,
developed  by  Bursuck  and  Asher  (1986)  consists  of  twelve  specific
social  situations  which  elementary  school  children  are  likely  to
encounter.  For  each  situation,  the  teacher  is  presented  with  three
possible reactions: a positive, negative, and  a withdrawal  mode. For
each mode, the teacher selects a rating (1—5) indicating how likely the
child  is  to  behave  in  that  manner.  Half  of  the  situations  represent
some kind  of social  conflict,  the other  half represent  maintaining  or
initiating social situations. All ratings assigned  to each  of the  modes
are  summed  for  conflict  vs.  nonconflict  situations;  then  scores  are
summed  across  all  twelve  situations.  Thus,  each  subject  receives  a
score  on  Positive,  Negative,  and  Withdrawal  scales  for  Conflict  vs.
Nonconflict  situations.

A  second  scale  developed  by  Bursuck  and  Asher  (1986)  elicits  a
teacher's  perceptions  of  a  child's  social  behavior  with  twelve  very

166 

D. M. KAGAN AND B. G. KOLOWSKI

general  items  describing  social  competence.  The  teacher  indicates
how frequently  (1-5) each subject: is helpful, is a good sport, resolves
disagreements,  talks  to  other  children,  etc.  A  summative  score  on
these twelve items is intended  to represent overall social competence.
The  third  rating  scale completed  by  the  teacher  was  the  Matson
Evaluation  of  Social  Skills  with  Youngsters  (MESSY)  (Kazdin,
Matson,  and  Esveldt-Dawson,  1984; Matson,  Rotatori,  and  Helsel,
1983).  This  is  a  64-item  inventory  that  is  organized  into  two
subscales: Inappropriate  Assertive/Impulsive  behaviors  and  Appro-
priate  Social  Skills.  Each  item  describes  a  specific  behavior,  and
teachers indicate how frequently  (1-5) a child manifests it. Test-retest
reliability  over a  two-week  interval  was computed  at  -55. Scores on
this instrument  have been shown to relate significantly  to ratings by
other  adults.  Relationships  with  actual  social  behaviors  observed
naturalistically  have never been examined  (Kazdin el al., 1984).

Peer  acceptance  was evaluated  for  each  of the  children  following
the  procedure  used  by  Ballard,  Corman,  Gottlieb,  and  Kaufman
(1977). Each child was asked how much he/she enjoyed  playing with
each  of the  other  children  in  the  class  (respective  target  children).
Subjects responded by circling one of three faces which ranged from a
frown  to a broad smile. Responses were converted into ordinal codes
(1-3),  and  mean  ratings were  then  computed  for  each  target  child.
Ratings  assigned  to classmates BY each  subject  were  also  recorded.
These  means  reflected  each  child's  affective  response  to  his/her
classmates.

Observations.  Subjects were observed  over a ninety day period.  For

two  weeks  prior  to  recording  any  data,  the  researchers  spent  two
hours a day becoming acquainted with the children: getting to know
their  names  and  becoming  accepted  as  a  regular  fixture  in  the
classroom. Actual observations began only after the children began to
behave in an uninhibited  fashion.

Each  child  was  observed  in  different  work  groups  of two  to  four
classmates, as they completed  tasks established  daily by the  teacher.
The  tasks included  cutting and  pasting, pre-writing  exercises, and  a
variety of visual and motor exercises designed  to introduce  numbers,
letters  and  abstract  concepts. The  children  in a work  group  usually
completed  these  tasks  collectively  rather  than  collaboratively.  An
observation  consisted  of one "episode," a cohesive social  interaction
that  lasted five to fifteen  minutes. The  boundaries  of episodes  were
clearly delineated  by the aggregation or dispersal of group members.

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL SKILL 

167

Data  were  recorded  initially  in  note  form  and  audiotaped,  then
transcribed  into  frequency  counts  for  specific  categories  of  verbal
behavior.  These  categories  were  derived  from  two  sources:  an
instrument  developed  empirically  from  research  on  co-operative
learning  (Johnson, Johnson,  Roy  and  Zaidman,  1986)  and  Strain,
Kerr,  Stagg  et a/.'s  (1983)  study  of  the  social  behaviors  of  kinder-
garteners. The result was a rating tool with eight categories of verbal
interaction:  On-task  behaviors: procedural  comments  concerning
directions  to  self  or  to  others  regarding  how  to  complete  a  task;
positive comments, explicitly praising or encouraging  others; negat-
ive comments, criticizing others; questions. Off-task behaviors: positive
comments, consisting of complimentary remarks; negative comments
concerning any individual or activity; questions ("What do you want
to do after lunch?"); neutral off-task  chatting  ("The other day I went
to the zoo").

Each  child  was  observed  during  twelve  separate  social  episodes,
each  time in the company  of different  classmates. Ten  percent of all
observations were evaluated  by three independent  raters  (using  tape
recordings)  in  order  to  estimate  interrater  reliability:  average
correlations  among  raters  were  above  -97.  For  each  episode,
frequency  counts  within  each  category  were  totalled  and  standard-
ized  by  dividing  them  by  the  total  number  of verbal  interactions
recorded during a particular episode. This was done to control for the
variable  length  of  episodes.  The  result  was  a  percentage  for  each
category of interaction. These percentages were then averaged  across
the twelve episodes per child.

Testing Procedures

The  Boehm  Test  was  administered  to  the  children  in  pairs, using  a
partition to prevent the children from seeing one another's responses.
The  Test  of Social  Inference  was  administered  individually,  and  a
tape  recorder  was  used  to  help  evaluate  responses.  The  classroom
teacher completed  the rating scales during the last week of the study.

Data Analysis 

'

The mean  percentages of verbal interaction  within each of the eight
categories were normalized with a square root transformation.  Scores
obtained  on the Test of Social Inference  were examined  both  before

168 

D. M. KAGANANDB. G. KOLOWSKI

and  after  variance  attributable  to  scores  on  the  Boehm  (cognitive
ability)  was  removed.  Bivariate  correlations  among  observational
data,  teacher  ratings,  peer  ratings  and  scores  on  the  Boehm  or  the
Test of Social Inference were then computed. Eight separate multiple
regression  analyses  were  also  completed:  the  dependent  variables
consisted  of  the  respective  categories  of  peer  interaction  observed
among the children. Predictors in each regression analysis consisted of
the remaining variables. The purpose of these regression analyses was
to determine how accurately social behaviors could be predicted  from
the set of pencil-and-paper  measures.

RESULTS

Bivariate correlations appear in Table  i. Scores on the Boehm Test of
mental  maturity  were  unrelated  to  the  test  of  social  cognition,
contrary  to  the  moderate  correlations  between  IQ_  and  social
cognition reported in prior studies (Rubin,  1973). However, scores on
the Boehm were related  to two kinds of peer interaction:  percentage
of  on-task  procedural  comments  (r. = -39)  and  on-task  negative
comments  (r. =  — -37,  both  p. <-O5).  Children  who  were  more
mentally  mature  appeared 
to  spend  more  time  directing  and
structuring  tasks for themselves and  for others.

Scores  on  the  Test  of  Social  Inference  (the  index  of  social
cognition)  correlated  with only one observable behavior:  percentage
of off-task  positive  comments  (r. = -39, p. <-05).  Scores  on  this  test
were unrelated  to peer  ratings, but  were positively related  to two of
the  teacher  rating  scales.  One  might  infer  that  subjects'  overall
sensitivity  to  nonverbal  social  cues  was  related  only  to  classroom
behaviors  perceived  as  inappropriate  or  aggressive  by  the  teacher.
This  seemed  to  suggest  that  social  sensitivity  among  the  children
reflected  the  knowledge  that  one  can  manipulate  one's  peers:  i.e.,
sophistication  about  the  potential  of  using  social  interaction  as  a
vehicle for asserting oneself.

Popularity  ratings  assigned  TO  subjects  by  their  classmates
correlated  negatively with on-task negative comments and  positively
with  on-task  questions  (r. =  — -42  and  .44,  respectively,  p.<-oi).
Children  who  expressed  negative  feelings  were  clearly  not  liked  as
well  as  those  who  refrained  from  this  behavior,  while  those  who
solicited  help  on  tasks  were  regarded  favorably.  Popularity  ratings
assigned BY subjects to their classmates were not related  to any other
variables.

Table I  Pearson correlations (n = 23)

Popularity 
by peers 

Social 

On-task 

cognition  procedural 

On-task 
positive 

On-task 
negative 

On-task 
questions 

OfT-task 
positive 

OIT-task 
negative 

OIT-task 
questions 

Off-task
neutral
socialising

Boehm  Test 
MESSY- 
appropriate
MESSY- 
inappropriate
Bursuck 
short  scale
Bursuck 
situational-
positive
Bursuck 
situational-
negative
Bursuck 
situational-
withdrawal
Social  cognition 
Popularity 
assigned  by  peers
Popularity 
assigned  to  peers

-26 
-6o** 

—08 
-12 

39* 
-26 

~"37* 

-12 
-18  —-46** 

'13 
"45** 

—01 
'29 

—11 
-oo 

—24  —-18

-03 

" " 3 6*

~ ' 2g 

-48**  ~-i4 

-28 

-33 

— -35* 

-oo 

-52** 

~-33  —-12

-51**  —-02 

-51** 

-25  —-49** 

-41* 

-16 

—-24 

—-07  —-45**

'53** 

'3° 

"19 

'34* 

~ ' 32 

'33 

-46**  —'23 

—-04  —-21

~ ' 5 3 ** 

' 3 ^*  —-io 

-04 

-36* 

~ ' 4 3*  —-07 

-47**  —-32  —-04

—-18 

—-48**  —-io 

—-17  — 10 

—-21 

~-3 9*  —-20 

-27 

-42*

-08 

—-io 

~H 

-03 

-19 

-08 

-16 

- I1 

'2I 
-16  —-42* 

—-28 

-44** 

-39* 
-09 

-21 
~ " I5 

—-u 

-05
-io  —-07

-14  —-08 

—-24 

-17 

—-07 

-14  —-07

*  P<c>5
**  p < oi
Mote. Coefficient  alpha computed  as follows: Boehm  =  -75, Bursuck short scale  =  -91, Bursuck situational-positive  =  -8i, Bursuck
situational-negative  =  -94, Bursuck  situational-withdrawal  =  85, MESSY-appropriate  =  97, MESSY- inappropriate  =  -97.

170 

D. M. KAGAN AND  B. G. KOLOWSKI

Rating  scales  completed  by  the  teacher  were  most  consistently
related  to observed  peer  interaction.  Results  obtained  with  each  of
the  three  scales  indicated  that  children  who  were  viewed  most
favorably  by the teacher exhibited  the most on-task behaviors, fewer
negative comments, and  less off-task  neutral  comments.

Only one of the multiple regression analyses yielded an equation in
which  more  than  one  independent  variable  significantly  predicted
observed  behavior: This was the analysis in which the amount  of on-
task  procedural  comments  was  predicted.  The  Bursuck  short  scale
and 
together  accounted  for  42%  of
variance  (26% by the Bursuck,  16% by the MESSY).

the  MESSY-Appropriate 

Means  and  standard  deviations  obtained  on  each  teacher  rating
scale  and  on  observational  measures  are  listed  in  Table  2.  Gender
differences  were examined  but  found  not  to be significant.  The  most
frequently  observed  kind  of  interaction  was  on-task  procedural
comments  (47% of an average episode). The second most  frequently
observed  interaction  was off-task  neutral  socializing  (21%). Positive
comments  were  nearly  non-existent.  Intercorrelations  among  the
observational  measures  were  also  examined  and  indicated  that
the  eight  different  categories  of  verbal  behavior  were  virtually
independent  dimensions.  Only  two  correlations  were  significant:
On-task  procedural  comments  and  off-task  neutral  socializing,
r. = -6o  (p.<-oi); off-task  questions and  off-task  positive comments,
r. = -4i  (p.<-05).

Table 2  Means and standard  deviations

Variable

Boehm test
MESSY-appropriate
MESSY-inappropriate
Bursuck short scale
Bursuck situational-positive subscale
Bursuck situational-negative  subscale
Bursuck situational-withdrawal  subscale
Mean popularity  rating by peers
Mean popularity  rating to peers
On-task  procedural
On-task  positive
On-task  negative
On-task  questions
Off-task  negative
Off-task  positive
Off-task  questions
Off-task  neutral  socializing

Mean

15-22
71-57
75-6i
35-oo
28-87
23-00
29-87
2-30
2-30

1-20 

46-86  (%)
(%)
• • • 9 o ( %)
•>'47(%)
6-5'  (%)
• ' 4 ( %)
2-10  (%)
20-59  (%)

SD

4-11
I7-5I
29-29
6-71
5-80
9-21
7-8i
•27
•36
15-82
3-4i
9-9'
7-8i
7-i5
•67
2-64
14-98

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL SKILL 

171

DISCUSSION

The primary purpose of this study was to examine correlations among
measures of social cognition or social competence and  the naturalistic
social behaviors of kindergarteners. The particular measure of social
cognition used in this study, the Test of Social Inference, appeared  to
be  related  to  only  one  type  of  variable:  teacher  ratings  of  the
childrens'  classroom  behaviors.  The  nature  of  the  relationship  was
unexpected,  suggesting  that  children  who were relatively  sophistic-
ated  in decoding social contexts also tended  to be perceived  by  their
teacher as inappropriately  aggressive or assertive. Contrary  to prior
studies,  no  significant  correlation  was  obtained  between  the  test  of
social  cognition  and  the  test of intellectual  maturity.  This might  be
attributable  to the very young age of the subjects  (five  to six years);
subjects  in  prior  studies  have  been  significantly  older,  and  the
correlations were only moderate in size (Rubin,  1973).

The  most  accurate  indices  of  actual  social  behaviors  were  the
rating  scales  completed  by  the  kindergarten  teacher,  who  had
observed  the children  for over six months prior  to this study. In  this
regard,  the  Bursuck  scales—both  the  short  scale  and  the  three
situational  subscales—most  consistently  reflected  actual  classroom
behavior.

Correlations involving ratings of peer popularity indicated that the
children  themselves  preferred  the  company  of  peers  who  avoided
negative  comments  and  who  frequently  solicited  help  on  tasks.
Requesting assistance from other members of a work group may have
appeared  to  be  a  friendly  overture,  an  invitation  to  interact  in  a
positive  manner.

In  sum,  social  cognition,  as operationalized  by  the Test  of Social
Inference,  appeared  to  be  of little  relevance  either  to  actual  social
behaviors  or to peer popularity.  Instead, it emerged  as a variable of
relevance  to  the  teacher.  Children  more  able  to  decode  nonverbal
social cues appeared  to be at no social advantage. Indeed,  this sort of
knowledge was related  to negative teacher perceptions. It is import-
ant  to  remember  that  only  one  definition  and  one  test  of  social
cognition were evaluated here. Social cognition has also been  defined
as role-taking ability, empathy, etc. It is possible that tests evaluating
one of these alternative definitions may produce data more indicative
of actual social behaviors.

It is also possible that the sharp separation between social cognition
and social competency as defined  by peer acceptance, that was found

172 

D. M. KAGAN AND  B. G. KOLOWSKI

here,  is  a  function  of  age.  A  comparative  study  examining  the
relevance of social cognition to peer popularity in each of several age
groups could help clarify  the role played by social knowledge. In  fact,
a  significant  relationship  between  social  cognition  and  peer  popu-
larity may well emerge as a key developmental  sign.

References

Asher, S.R.,  and Renshaw, P.D. (1981). Children without friends: Social knowledge
and  social-skill  training.  In  S.R.  Asher  and  J.M.  Gottman  (Eds.),  The
development of children's friendships (pp.273-296). N.Y.: Cambridge  U. Press.

Ballard,  M.,  Corman,  L.,  Gottlieb, J.,  and  Kaufman,  M.  (1977).  Improving  the

social  status  of  mainstreamed  retarded  children.  Journal  of  Educational
Psychology 69, 605-611.

Boehm, J.  (1981). Teacher praise; A functional  analysis. Review of Educational Research,

51,  5-32.

Bursuck, W.D., and Asher, S.R.  (1986). The relationship between social competence

and  achievement  in  elementary  school  children.  Journal  of  Clinical  Child
Psychology,  15, 41-49.

Coie, J.D., Dodge, K.A. and Coppotelli, H. (1982). Dimensions and types of status: A

cross-age perspective. Developmental Psychology,  18, 557-570.

Dodge, K.A.  (1983). Behavioral  antecedents of peer social status. Child Development,

54,  1386-1399.

Edmonson,  B., deJung, J.,  Leland,  H.,  and  Leach,  E.M.  (1974).  The Test of Social

Inference:  Administration  and scoring guide. Baldwin,  N.Y.:  Educational  Activ-
ities, Inc.

Green,  K.D.,  Forehand,  R.,  Beck,  S.J.,  and  Vosk, B. (1980). An  assessment  of the
relationship  among measures of children's social competence  and  children's
academic achievement.  Child Development, 51, 1149-1156.

Gresham,  F.M.  (1986).  Conceptual  and  definitional  issues  in  the  assessment  of
children's social skills: Implications for  classification  and  training. Journal of
Clinical Child Psychology,  15, 3-15.

Gronlund,  H.,  and  Anderson,  L.  (1963).  Personality  characteristics  of  socially
accepted,  socially  neglected,  and  socially  rejected  junior  high  pupils.  In  J.
Sederman  (Ed.), Educating for  mental health  (pp.  150-167). N.Y.: Crowell.
Johnson, D.W., Johnson, R.T., Roy, P., and Zaidman, B. (1986). Oral interaction in
cooperative  learning  groups:  Speaking,  listening,  and  the  nature  of  state-
ments  made  by  high-,  medium-,  and  low-achieving  students.  Journal of
Psychology,  119, 303-321.

Kazdin,  A.E.,  Matson, J.L.,  and  Esveldt-Dawson,  K.  (1984). The  relationship  of
role-play  assessment  of children's  social  skills to multiple  measures  of social
competence. Behaviour research and Therapy, 22,  129-139.

Kohn,  M.  (1977).  The  Kohn  Social  Competence  Scale  and  Kohn  Symptom

Checklist for the preschool child: A follow-up report. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 5, 249-262.

Matson, J.L.,  Rotatori, A.F. and Helsel, W.J.  (1983). Development  of a rating scale
to measure  social  skills in  children:  The  Matson  Evaluation  of Social  Skills
with Youngsters  (MESSY). Behaviour Research and Therapy, 21, 335-340.

SOCIAL COGNITION AND SOCIAL SKILL 

173

Morrison, R.L., and Bellack, A.S. (1981). The role of social perception in social skill.

Behavior  Therapy,  12,  69-79.

Rubin,  K.H.  (1973).  Egocentricism  in  childhood:  A  unitary  construct?  Child

Development, 44,  102-110.

Shantz,  C.U.  (1975).  The development  of social cognition. In  E.M.  Heatherington

(Ed.), Review of child development research  (Vol. 5, pp. 257-323). Chicago, ILL:
U. of Chicago Press.

