Journal of Family  Psychology
2001,  Vol.  15, No. 2, 315-333

Copyright  2001 by the American  Psychological  Association, Inc.
DOI:  10.1037//0893-3200.15.2.315

0893-3200/01/S5.00 

Interparental  Conflict,  Children's  Social  Cognitions, and

Child  Aggression: A Test of a Mediational  Model

Nicole  Eldridge  Marcus, Kristin M. Lindahl, and Neena M. Malik

University  of  Miami

Although  correlations  between  interparental  conflict  and child  maladjustment  are
well-established, the processes connecting these 2 phenomena  are less  understood.
The  present  study  tested  whether  an aggressogenic  cognitive  style  mediates the
relationship  between  interparental  conflict  and  child  aggression.  A  multiethnic
sample of 115 families with a child between the ages of 7 and 13 years participated.
Questionnaires  were used to assess parents'  and children's  perceptions of interpa-
rental  conflict,  children's  social  problem-solving  strategies  and beliefs  about ag-
gression, and parent and teacher reports of child aggression. Support was found for
the  mediating  effect  of aggressogenic  cognitions  on children's  school  aggression
but  not  on  children's  aggression  at  home.  Implications  for  understanding  the
associations  among  interparental  conflict,  children's  social  cognitions,  and child
aggression  in different  environmental  contexts  are discussed.

Aggression  is one of the most disruptive  and
pervasive  behavioral  problems  for  children
(Waldman,  1996).  Unlike  other  behaviors  that
remit  over  the  course  of  development,  aggres-
sive behavior typically persists across situations

Nicole  Eldridge  Marcus,  Kristin  M. Lindahl, and
Neena M. Malik, Department of Psychology, Univer-
sity of Miami.

This article is based on a master's thesis by Nicole
Eldridge Marcus, completed  under the supervision of
Kristin  M. Lindahl and Neena  M. Malik. Portions of
these  data  were  presented  at  the  November  1999
Association  for Advancement  of  Behavior  Therapy
Annual Convention in Toronto, Canada. The research
was supported by National Institute of Mental Health
Grant R03MH54631.

We are sincerely grateful  to committee members J.
Douglas  Coatsworth  and  Craig  Mason  for  their
thoughtful  input regarding the study; Kelly L. Heiges
and Sean J. K. Spiegel for their many contributions to
this  research  project;  the undergraduate  research as-
sistants  for their  involvement  in data  collection and
entry;  and all of the children,  parents,  and teachers
who graciously  participated.

Correspondence  concerning  this  article  should be
addressed to Nicole Eldridge Marcus, Department of
Psychology,  Psychology  Annex,  Post  Office  Box
249229,  University  of Miami, Coral  Gables,  Florida
33124-0721.  Electronic  mail  may  be  sent  to
neldridge@umiami.ir.miami.edu.

and  relationships  (Coie  &  Kupersmidt,  1983),
and aggression  at a young age is the single best
predictor  of  later  aggression  and  delinquency
(Farrington,  1991; Huesmann, Eron,  Lefkowitz,
&  Walder,  1984).  Although  children  raised  in
threatening or violent neighborhoods may come
to  view  aggressive  behavior  as  an  appropriate
means  of  assuring  self-protection  and  adapting
to a hostile environment (Coie & Dodge, 1998),
aggressive  behavior  nonetheless  predicts  nu-
merous  adult  problems,  including  crime,  alco-
holism,  drug  abuse,  unemployment,  divorce,
and mental illness (Farrington,  1995; Haapasalo
& Tremblay,  1994; McCord  & McCord,  1960;
Robins,  1966).

A  significant  body  of  literature  exists  inves-
tigating the factors  that may influence  the onset
and developmental  course of aggressive behav-
ior.  One  familial  variable  that  has  become
widely  recognized  within  the  past  two  decades
to have a deleterious impact on child  adjustment
in  general  and  specifically  on  externalizing  be-
havior  is  marital  (or  interparental)  conflict
(Cummings  &  Davies,  1994;  Davies  &  Cum-
mings,  1994;  Emery,  1982;  Fincham,  1994;
Grych  &  Fincham,  1990;  Lindahl,  1998;  Lin-
dahl  & Malik,  1999). In particular,  exposure  to
overt  parental  conflict  appears  to  be  the  aspect
of  marital  functioning  most  closely  associated

315

316

MARCUS,  LINDAHL,  AND  MALIK

with externalizing  behaviors  such as aggression
(Jenkins  & Smith,  1991).

Although  few  would  dispute that an  associa-
tion  between  interparental  conflict  and  chil-
dren's  externalizing  behavior  exists,  less  well
studied  are  the  pathways  connecting  these  two
phenomena.  To  date,  only  a  few  models  have
been  proposed,  and  these  have  varied  widely,
ranging  from  direct  effects  of  interadult  anger
(Cummings,  1987) to indirect  effects  by  means
of parental disturbance  (Fauber & Long,  1991),
ineffective  family  functioning  patterns  (Lin-
dahl,  1998;  Lindahl  &  Malik,  1999),  or  chil-
dren's  appraisals  of  parental  conflict  (Grych  &
Fincham,  1990,  1993).  A  factor  that  has  been
left  largely unexplored and that was targeted as
the primary focus of the present study is the role
that  children's  social  cognitions  might  play  in
the  association  between  marital  conflict  and
child  aggression.

Social  learning  theory  predicts  that  children
who  witness 
their  parents'  nonconstructive
means  of  resolving  interpersonal  conflict  have
frequent  opportunities  to  observe,  acquire,  and
generate ineffective  methods for resolving  their
own  interpersonal  problems  (Bandura,  1973).
To  be  specific,  children  exposed  to  frequent,
intense, and unresolved  marital  conflict  may be
at  risk  for  the  development  of  poor  social
problem-solving  skills  and  distorted  beliefs
about  the  legitimacy  and  normality  of  aggres-
sion  (both  verbal  and  physical)  because  of  the
conflict  that they observe between their parents.
Indeed, marital violence research provides some
support  for  a link  between  children's  exposure
to destructive forms of interparental conflict and
distorted  social  cognitive  patterns.  Children
who  witness  marital  violence  have  been  found
to  exhibit  deficits  in  social  problem-solving
skills  (Groisser,  1986;  Rosenberg,  1987),  poor
interpersonal 
1986;
Rosenberg,  1987),  and  distorted  attitudes  to-
ward  violence  (Jaffe,  Wilson,  &  Wolfe,  1986;
Straus,  Gelles,  &  Steinmetz,  1980).  In  social
problem-solving  tasks, child  witnesses to inter-
parental  violence  propose  few  constructive
strategies  (e.g.,  direct  discussion,  assertive  ac-
tion,  and  mutual  compromise)  and  more  non-
constructive  strategies  (e.g.,  verbal  or  physical
aggression;  Groisser,  1986). Children  who wit-
ness extensive marital violence also exhibit dis-
torted  beliefs  about  aggression,  such  as the be-

sensitivity 

(Groisser, 

lief  that  it  is  appropriate  for  a  man  to  strike  a
woman if the house is messy (Jaffe  et al., 1986).
Study of the relation between marital  conflict
and  children's  social  cognitions  has  been  lim-
ited largely, however, to child residents of shel-
ters  for  battered  women  (e.g.,  Groisser,  1986;
Jaffe  et  al.,  1986; Rosenberg,  1987). This  nar-
row  emphasis  on  clinically  violent  families  is
surprising,  given  the  evidence  that  children's
exposure  to less  severe degrees  of  marital  con-
flict  than  physical  violence  lowers  thresholds
for  emotional  regulation  and  stimulates  angry
cognitions and feelings  of hostility (Cummings,
1987;  Cummings,  Iannotti,  &  Zahn-Waxier,
1985;  Cummings,  Zahn-Waxier,  &  Radke-
Yarrow,  1984).  Such  feelings  of  hostility  and
difficulty  with  self-regulation  could  compro-
mise  children's  social  problem-solving  strate-
gies  and  beliefs  about  aggression,  independent
of  whether  severe  violence  is  observed  or  not.
Indeed, in one of the first studies to examine the
link  between  marital  conflict  and  social  cogni-
tions  in  a  community  sample,  Goodman,  Bar-
foot,  Frye, and Belli  (1999)  found  marital  con-
flict to be negatively  associated  with  children's
social  problem-solving  skills.  Although  chil-
dren's  perceptions  of  marital  conflict  were  not
significant  predictors  of  their  social  problem-
solving  strategies,  mothers'  reports  of  conflict
escalation  were  significantly,  albeit  modestly,
associated  with  children's  less  effective  social
problem-solving  solutions.  Because  no  data
were obtained on child adjustment,  Goodman et
al.  (1999)  were  unable  to  test  whether  social
problem-solving  skills  might  mediate  the asso-
ciation  between  marital  conflict  and  children's
development of behavioral problems. However,
the study expanded  on previous findings within
clinical  populations  and  provided  valuable  ini-
tial  evidence  for  a  link  between  children's  ex-
posure  to  nonviolent  marital  conflict  and  chil-
dren's  maladaptive  social  cognitions.

Numerous  studies in the child aggression  lit-
erature have, in turn, found  a link between  cer-
tain  types  of  social  cognitions  and  aggressive
behavior,  such that children  who display  social
problem-solving  deficits  and  distorted  beliefs
about the legitimacy  of  aggression  are likely  to
behave aggressively (Guerra, Huesmann, Tolan,
Van  Acker,  &  Eron,  1995;  Huesmann  &
Guerra,  1997; Lochman  & Dodge,  1994; Loch-
man  &  Lampron,  1986;  Quiggle,  Garber,
Panak,  &  Dodge,  1992;  Rabiner,  Lenhart,  &

CHILDREN'S  SOCIAL  COGNITIONS

317

Lochman,  1990;  Slaby  &  Guerra,  1988).  For
example, aggressive  children  tend  to access so-
cial  problem-solving  responses  that  are  more
aggressive and less prosocial than the responses
of  nonaggressive  children  (Asarnow  &  Callan,
1985;  Deluty,  1981; Pettit,  Dodge,  &  Brown,
1988;  Quiggle  et  al.,  1992; Richard  & Dodge,
1982). In  addition,  aggressive  children  and  ad-
olescents  tend  to  endorse  several  distorted  be-
liefs,  including  beliefs  that  aggression  is  a  le-
gitimate response to provocation, increases self-
esteem,  helps  to  avoid  a  negative  self-image,
and  does  not  produce  suffering 
(Slaby  &
Guerra,  1988).

The  primary  objectives  of  the  present  study
were  to  (a)  integrate  the  separate  literatures
linking 
interparental  violence-conflict  with
children's  social  cognitions  and  children's  so-
cial  cognitions  with  child  aggression  and  (b)
examine  whether  children's  social  cognitions
mediate  the  relationship  between  marital  con-
flict and child aggression. Four hypotheses were
tested  in  the  present  study.  First,  we  hypothe-
sized that parent and child reports of overt phys-
ical  and  verbal  interparental  conflict  would  be
positively  associated  with  children's  overt
physical  and  verbal  aggressive  behavior,  as
rated  by  parents  and  teachers.  Overt  child  ag-
gression  was  defined  as  aggression  that  harms
others  through  harm  (or  threat  of  harm)  to  an-
other's  physical  or  psychological  well-being
and  included  behaviors  such  as bullying, phys-
ically  attacking, threatening,  and teasing  others
(Crick,  Casas,  &  Mosher,  1997;  McNeilly-
Choque,  Hart,  Robinson,  Nelson,  &  Olsen,
1996).

Second,  we  hypothesized  that  children's  ex-
posure to overt physical and verbal  interparental
conflict  would  be  associated  with  an  aggresso-
genic  cognitive  style,  defined  for  the  purposes
of  the  present  study  as  a pattern  of  social  cog-
nitions  related  to  aggressive  behavior  and  in-
tent. To be specific,  an aggressogenic  cognitive
style  was  operationalized  to  include  two  pri-
mary  components:  (a)  endorsement  of  physi-
cally  and verbally  aggressive  strategies to solve
interpersonal  problems  and  (b)  acceptance  of
the 
legitimacy  of  verbal  and  physical
aggression.

Third,  we  predicted  that  an  aggressogenic
cognitive  style  in  children  would  be  positively
associated  with  children's  overt  physical  and

verbal  aggressive  behavior,  as rated  by  parents
and  teachers.

Finally,  we  hypothesized  that  an  aggresso-
genic cognitive  style in children would  mediate
the  relation  between  overt  marital  conflict  and
children's  overt  aggressive  behavior.  We  pre-
dicted  that  an  aggressogenic  cognitive  style
would  serve  as  a  mechanism  through  which
interparental  conflict  was  related  to  child  ag-
gression.  The  aggressogenic  framework  pro-
posed  in  the  present  study  is  consistent  with
recent research that has supported the mediating
role of maladaptive social-cognitive  patterns in
the  relation  between  other  family  functioning
variables,  such  as  early  harsh  discipline,  and
child  aggression 
(Dodge,  Pettit,  Bates,  &
Valente,  1995; Pettit,  Harrist,  Bates, & Dodge,
1991; Weiss, Dodge, Bates, & Pettit,  1992).

Child  aggression,  as  opposed  to  child  delin-
quency  or  the  broader  category  of  children's
externalizing  behaviors,  was  specified  as  the
outcome  variable  in  the  present  study  for  two
primary  reasons.  First,  the  aggressogenic  cog-
nitions  proposed  as  a mediating  mechanism  in
the present  study  (i.e., children's  normative be-
liefs  about  aggression  and  propensity  toward
aggressive  social  problem-solving  solutions)
have consistently  been  studied  in relation  to an
individual's  tendency  to  behave  aggressively,
rather than in relation to a broader  externalizing
behavior  pattern  (e.g.,  Deluty,  1981,  1983,
1985;  Forman,  1980;  Guerra  &  Slaby,  1990;
Huesmann & Guerra,  1997; Huesmann, Guerra,
Miller, & Zelli,  1992). Of those few studies that
have  examined  social  information-processing
patterns  across  different  childhood  problems,
social problem-solving deficits have been  found
to be more characteristic of  aggressive  children
than  children  with  other  types  of  externalizing
problems  (e.g.,  socialized  conduct  disorder,  at-
tention  deficit  disorder;  e.g.,  Dodge, Price, Ba-
chorowski,  &  Newman,  1990;  McClaskey,
1988; Milich  &  Dodge,  1984),  suggesting  that
models  incorporating  aggressogenic  cognitions
(such  as the one presented  in the current  study)
should focus  on the demonstrated  link  between
aggressogenic  cognitions  and  aggressive
behavior.

Second,  with  few  exceptions  (see  Hart,  Nel-
son,  Robinson,  Olsen,  &  McNeilly-Choque,
1998), research on the association between mar-
ital  conflict  and  child  adjustment  has  typically
examined  global  categories  of  child  maladjust-

318

MARCUS,  LINDAHL,  AND  MALIK

ment  (e.g.,  externalizing,  internalizing,  psychi-
atric  disorders)  as opposed  to  specific  behavior
problems  such  as  aggression.  As  a  result,  as
noted  by  Fincham  (1994),  very  little  is  under-
stood  about  how  specific  aspects  of  parental
conflict  are  related  to  specific  aspects  of  chil-
dren's  adjustment.  The present  study  addressed
this  shortcoming  by  focusing  not  only  on  a
specific  type of interparental conflict  (overt con-
flict), but also on a specific  type of externalizing
behavior (overt physical and verbal aggression).

Method

Participants

Participants  in this investigation  were drawn  from
a larger study of family  interaction patterns within an
urban  and  ethnically  diverse  metropolitan  area.  To
recruit  a  multiethnic  sample  of  families,  flyers  were
sent  home  in  English  and  Spanish  to  parents  of
second- through  sixth-grade children in over 40 local
public  schools. This recruitment  strategy  was chosen
because  students  attending  public  schools  comprise
nearly  90%  of  the  school-aged  children  residing  in
Miami-Dade  County  (Office  of Educational  Evalua-
tion  and  Management  Analysis,  1999).  The  flyers
briefly  described  a study  of  family  relationships  and
communication  patterns  and  stated  that couples  who
had lived together for at least 2 years and who had an
8-  to  12-year-old  child  were  eligible  to  participate.
The flyers indicated  that  families  would  receive  $70
as  compensation  for  their  participation  and  would
also  be eligible  for  free  parent  counseling  sessions.
All  parents  who  telephoned  to  express  interest  in
the family  study  were then  screened during an initial
phone  call  to  ensure  an  adequate  level  of  English
reading ability (sixth-grade level minimum) and two-
parent household  status before  inclusion in the study.
Of  the  approximately  333  families  who  initially
called  to  express  interest  in  the  study,  275  families
(87%)  provided  adequate  information  to  determine
eligibility  for  the  study.  Sixty-seven  percent  of  the
families  who  provided  enough  information  met  in-
clusion  criteria  for  the  study  (n  =  184), and  64% of
these families  actually  participated  in the study  (n =
118).

Data  were  collected  from  118  second-  through
sixth-grade children and their parents. After  adjusting
for  families  with  missing  data,  the  listwise  deletion
sample of families  with no missing data consisted of
115  children  (51  boys,  64  girls)  and  their  parents.
Children ranged  in age from  7 to  13 years (M =  9.85
years,  SD  =  1.45  years).  It  was  the  intention  of  the
study  to  recruit  children  ages  8-12  years,  and,  in-
deed,  97% of children  fell  in this targeted  age range.
However,  the  sample  did  include  three  7-year-olds
and  one  13-year-old.  The  racial-ethnic  composition

of children  in the present  sample  was 57% (n  =  66)
with  at  least  one  Hispanic  (Cuban  American  and
Latin  American)  parent,  21% (n  =  24)  with  at  least
one  Black  (African  American  and  Caribbean  Amer-
ican)  parent,  20%  (n  =  23)  with  two  Anglo-
American  parents, and 4%  in  =  5) with  at least  one
Asian  parent.  The  ethnic  breakdown  of  the  sample
was generally  similar to that of  the community  from
which it was drawn, though  Black children  (estimat-
ed  to  make  up  33%  of  the  Miami-Dade  County
Public  School  population)  were  underrepresented
slightly  (Office  of  Educational  Evaluation  and  Man-
agement  Analysis,  1999).

Ninety  percent of the mothers had completed  high
school,  and  32%  had  completed  college.  Mothers'
mean  age  was  38  years  (SD  =  6.33  years).  The
corresponding  figures  for  fathers  were  comparable:
90%  of  the  fathers  had  completed  high  school,  and
29% had completed college. The mean age for  fathers
was  41  years  (SD  =  7.85  years).  One  hundred  and
four  couples  were  married,  and  the  remaining  11
couples had been  living  together for  at least 2 years.
The average marriage length for married couples was
12 years (SD =  5.48 years), and the average relation-
ship length of nonmarried couples was 7 years (SD  =
5.57  years).  Of  the  115  participating  families,  90
couples  (77%)  reported  that  both  adults  were  the
biological  or  adopted  parents  of  the  participating
child; 27 couples (23%) reported that only the mother
was  the  biological  parent  of  the participating  child.
The  median  annual  family  income  was  $47,940,
which  is  above  the  median  household  income  in
Miami-Dade County of $34,155 (Conway Data, Inc.,
2000). Despite the middle-class nature of the sample,
many  children  reported  being  exposed  to  problems
commonly  associated  with  living  in  an  urban  area.
For  example,  53%  (n  =  61)  reported  having  seen
somebody  arrested,  23%  (n  =  26)  reported  having
seen drug deals, and 7% (n =  8) reported having seen
somebody  get  shot.

Procedure

Families came to a laboratory  setting for  a session
that  lasted  approximately  3 hr.  Parents  were  placed
individually  in  separate  rooms  and  completed  ques-
tionnaires  about  family  demographics,  marital  func-
tioning,  and  child  behavior  as  well  as  measures  of
family  functioning  relevant  to  the  larger  project.
Children  completed  a  packet  of  questionnaires  in  a
separate  room  with  the  assistance  of  a  trained  grad-
uate  or  undergraduate  student.  All  questions  were
read  aloud  to  the  child  in  order  to  minimize  differ-
ences in children's  reading abilities. If it was unclear
whether  the  child  understood  the  question,  it  was
reworded  until  the child  clearly  understood.

Parental  consent  was  obtained  to  send  question-
naires  to  the  participating  child's  primary  teacher.
Teachers  were  then  mailed  a  packet  of  question-

CHILDREN'S  SOCIAL  COGNITIONS

319

naires, a copy of the parent's  consent  form,  and a $5
honorarium 
the
questionnaires.

for  completing  and  returning 

Measures

The  measures  are grouped  in three  categories: (a)
reports  of  interparental  conflict,  (b) children's  self-
reports  of  social  cognitions,  and  (c)  child  behavior
rating  scales.

Interparental  conflict.  The  Revised  Conflict
Tactics Scale (CTS2; Straus, Hamby, Boney-McCoy,
&  Sugarman,  1995) is a recent revision of one of the
most  commonly  used  measures  to  assess  strategies
used  in couples'  conflict  situations.  The CTS2 con-
sists  of  39 items  intended  to  measure  the extent  to
which specific  conflict  tactics, such as verbal reason-
ing,  psychological  aggression,  and physical  aggres-
sion,  occur  in  one's  dating  or  marital  relationship.
Two  scales  from  the CTS2  were  combined  for the
present  study  to produce  an aggregate  score of part-
ner  aggression:  Psychological  Aggression  (8 items),
assessing  the  frequency  with  which  hurtful  state-
ments  and threats  are used  during  conflicts  (e.g., "I
insulted  or  swore  at my partner,"  and "I  called my
partner fat or ugly"), and Physical Assault (12 items),
assessing  the  use  of  low-  to  high-level  physically
assaultive  tactics  during  arguments  (e.g.,  "I  threw
something  at  my  partner  that  could  hurt,"  and  "I
pushed or shoved my partner"). Parents were asked to
indicate how often  they, as well as their partner, had
engaged  in  each  behavior  over  the past  year.  Self-
and  partner-reports  of each  parent's  level of aggres-
sion  were  significantly  related  for both  mothers and
fathers  (rs  =  .57 and  .52, respectively,  ps  <  .001)
and were averaged to obtain a CTS Aggression  score
for  each  member  of  the  couple.  Thus,  the  female
score  (reflecting  aggression  perpetrated  by  mothers)
averaged  the female  self-report  and the male partner
report, whereas the male score (reflecting  aggression
perpetrated  by fathers)  averaged  the male  self-report
and  the female  partner  report.  In the current  study,
Aggression  scores  ranged  from  0 to  105 for women
(M  =  19.96, SD =  20.22)  and from  0 to  101.50 for
men (M =  18.07, SD =  19.29). At least one instance
of  physical  aggression  within  the past  year  was re-
ported for 37% of the participating men (n = 42) and
37%  of  the  participating  women  (n  =  42).  Good
internal consistency was found for this scale (a = .80
for  women  and .81 for men).

The  Children's  Perceptions  of  Interparental Con-
flict Scale  (CPIC; Grych,  Seid, & Fincham,  1992)  is
a 51-item questionnaire designed to assess children's
appraisals of multiple dimensions of marital  conflict.
The CPIC yields a total score and three subscales that
assess  perceptions  of  parental  conflict,  threat  to the
self,  and self-blame.  Because  the interparental con-
flict factor  examined  in the present  model reflected a
combination of parents' and children's perceptions of

the  quality  and quantity  of  interparental  conflict be-
ing displayed  at home, as opposed to children's  self-
appraisals of their own experience during  interparen-
tal conflict  (e.g.,  sense of threat  or self-blame),  only
the Conflict  Properties  Scale  (19 items)  of the CPIC
was used. The Conflict Properties Scale assesses chil-
dren's  appraisals  of  the  intensity,  frequency,  and
level  of  resolution  of  their  parents'  conflict,  with
higher  scores  indicating  perceptions  of  conflict  that
occurs  often,  involves  higher  levels  of hostility and
aggression,  and  is  poorly  resolved.  In  the  current
study,  children's  reports  of  interparental  conflict
scores ranged from 0 to 30 (M =  12.64, SD = 7.71).
Very  good  internal  consistency  was  found  for  this
scale  (a  = .89).

Social  cognition  measures.  The Children's Ac-
tion  Tendency  Scale  (CATS; Deluty,  1979) is a 30-
item measure designed to assess children's  problem-
solving  skills in peer  conflict  situations. The child is
presented  with  10 hypothetical  vignettes.  For  each
vignette, an interpersonal  problem  is described  (e.g.,
a  peer  shoves  a child  out of line), and then  each of
three possible behavioral  responses to the problem is
presented  in random  order.  The responses  include a
reactively  aggressive  (physical  or  verbal)  response
(e.g.,  push  the  peer  back  out  of  line,  call  the  peer
mean and selfish), a nonaggressive assertive response
(e.g., tell the peer, "You've no right to do that"), and
a submissive response (e.g., go to the end of the line).
Responses  are  summed  along  three  subscales: Ag-
gressiveness, Assertiveness, and Submissiveness. For
the  purposes  of the current  study,  only  the Aggres-
siveness  subscale  was used.  Scores  on this  measure
can  vary  from  0  to  20. For the  present  study,  the
Aggression  scale  scores  ranged  from  0 to  13 (M =
3.10,  SD  =  3.19).  Seventy-nine  percent  of the chil-
dren  indicated  that  they  would  retaliate  aggressively
in  at  least  one of  the  10 presented  scenarios. Ade-
quate  internal  consistency  was found  for  this  scale
(a  = .76).

An  open-ended  social  information-processing  in-
strument  frequently  used  by  Dodge  and  colleagues
(e.g.,  Dodge,  Bates,  &  Pettit,  1990; Dodge  et  al,
1995; Pettit et al., 1988; Weiss et al., 1992) was also
included  in the present  study  in order  to assess the
level  of aggressiveness  in children's  proposed  solu-
tions  to ambiguous  interpersonal  situations. The so-
cial  information-processing  instrument  (abbreviated
as  SIPI  for the present  study)  consists  of eight car-
toon  drawings,  each  accompanied  by  a  brief  story.
The child is told to imagine himself or herself in each
of  the eight  scenarios.  In  four  peer  entry  vignettes,
the target child is either not responded to by others or
is excluded  from  a group, but it is not clear  why. In
four  provocation  vignettes,  another  child  hurts  the
target child in some way, and again, the intention of
the  other  child  is unclear.  In all eight  scenarios, the
intentions of the other child's  actions are ambiguous
and  may be interpreted  as hostile or nonhostile.

320

MARCUS,  LINDAHL,  AND MALIK

After  presentation of each story, the child is asked
to state what he or she would do if he or she were the
protagonist  in the story. The number of responses in
which  the  child  replies  he  or  she  would  retaliate
physically  is  computed  for  each  child.  This  score
represents  the characteristic  level of aggression  in a
child's  responses  to  others'  aggressive  behaviors
when the intent of these behaviors is ambiguous, with
higher  scores  indicating  more  aggressive  responses.
For the present study, scores ranged from 0 to 4 (M =
0.43, SD = 0.94). Twenty-one percent of the children
indicated  that  they  would  retaliate  physically  in at
least  one  of  the  eight  provided  scenarios.  In the
present  sample,  all  of  the  vignettes  were  indepen-
dently  coded.  Out of 920 total  responses,  914 were
coded  identically  by the independent  rater  and the
initial  interviewers,  indicating  agreement  on 99% of
the  cases.  Internal  consistency  for  this  scale  was
adequate  (a  = .66).

The  Normative  Beliefs  About  Aggression  Scale
(NOBAGS; Huesmann  & Guerra,  1997) is a 20-item
self-report  questionnaire  designed  to  measure  a
child's  perception  of the acceptability  of  aggressive
behavior.  The questionnaire  yields  a total  score and
two subscales. For the purposes of the current  study,
only the Approval of Retaliation Scale (12 items) was
used.  The  Approval  of  Retaliation  Scale  assesses
children's  approval  of  reactive  aggression  in  re-
sponse  to  specific  provocations  (both  verbal  and
physical),  with  four  key dimensions  (severity  of the
provocation,  severity  of the response,  gender  of the
provoker,  and  gender  of  the  respondent)  varying
across  items.  Children  respond  on a  4-point  scale,
with  higher  scores  indicating  more  support  for ag-
gressive  responses.  Responses  are  then  averaged,
yielding  Approval  of  Retaliation  Scale  scores  that
can  range  from  1 to  4.  In  the  present  study,  the
Approval  of Retaliation  Scale  scores  ranged  from  1
to 3.25 (M =  1.54, SD = 0.52).  Very  good  internal
consistency  was found  for this  scale (a  = .88).

Aggressive  behavior  problems.  Aggressive  be-
havior  was  measured  through  the parallel  parent and
teacher  forms  of the Achenbach  questionnaires: the
Child  Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach, 1991)
and  the CBCL  Teacher  Rating  Form  (CBCL-TRF;
Achenbach,  1991). The CBCL is a well-standardized
and well-validated  113-item parent report measure of
children's  behavior  problems. Only  responses to the
20-item  Aggressive Behavior  subscale, a subscale of
the  Externalizing  Behavior  Problems  Scale,  were
used  in  the  present  study.  Responses  are  scored  2
(very true or often  true),  1 (somewhat or sometimes
true),  or 0 (not true) to indicate the degree to which
the  child  displays  each  behavior.  For  the  current
study,  mother  and father  reports  on the CBCL Ag-
gressive  Behavior  subscale  were  significantly  corre-
lated  (r  — .36, p  <.001).  As a result,  mothers' and
fathers'  data were averaged to create a mean parental
report  for aggressive  behavior.  Aggressive  Behavior

raw  scores  in the current  sample  ranged  from  0 to
27.50 (M = 6.91, SD = 4.80). Corresponding t scores
based  on  norms  for  a  child's  sex  and  age  group
ranged  from  50 to 81.50  (M =  53.83,  SD =  5.21).
Eighty-seven percent of the children received / scores
of 60 or less, 12% were placed in the borderline range
between  60  and  69,  and  1%  were  placed  in the
clinical range with t scores of 70 or greater. Excellent
internal consistency  was established  for parents' rat-
ings (a  = .91).

Each  child's  primary  teacher  was asked  to  com-
plete  CBCL-TRF,  a  reliable  and valid  measure of
child behavior in school  settings  (Achenbach,  1991).
As  with  the  parent  ratings,  only  responses  to the
25-item  Aggressive  Behavior  subscale, a subscale of
the  Externalizing  Behavior  Problems  Scale,  were
used in the present study, and items were scored on a
3-point  scale. Teacher reports  of Aggressive  Behav-
ior raw scores in the current sample ranged from 0 to
48  (M = 6.34, SD =  8.67).  Corresponding  t scores
based  on  norms  for  a  child's  sex  and  age  group
ranged  from  50  to  97  (M  =  55.97,  SD  =  8.06).
Seventy-nine percent of the children received / scores
of 60 or less, 17% were placed in the borderline range
between  60  and  69,  and  4%  were  placed  in the
clinical  range  with  t scores of 70 or greater.

Results

Preliminary  Analyses

We  conducted  preliminary  analyses  to  eval-
uate  the  normality  of  all  distributions.  An  ex-
amination  of  frequency  distributions  indicated
positively  skewed  distributions  (absolute  val-
ues  >  1.9)  and  positive  kurtosis  (absolute  val-
ues  >  4.9) for  fathers'  CTS2  scores  and  teach-
ers'  CBCL-TRF  scores. In order  not  to  violate
univariate  normality  assumptions,  we  con-
ducted  square-root 
the
CBCL-TRF  and  CTS2  to  convert  the  original
scores  to  new  scores  that  would  be  more  nor-
mally  distributed.  All  analyses  reported  below
were 
transformed
variables.

transformations  on 

conducted  with 

these 

Child  age  was  examined  in  relation  to  the
dependent variables of parent-reported child ag-
gression  and  teacher-reported  child  aggression.
Because it did not correlate with parent-reported
child  aggression  (r  =  -.08)  and  correlated
weakly  with  teacher-reported  child  aggression
(r  =  -.20), child  age was  not  used  as a control
variable  in  the  following  analyses.

Correlational  Analyses

We first examined the intercorrelations for all
indicators  of  observed  and  latent  constructs

CHILDREN'S  SOCIAL  COGNITIONS

321

used  in testing the theoretical model  (see Table
1).  Initial  evidence  for  the  convergent  validity
of  each  of  the  major  constructs  included  in  the
theoretical  model  can  be  demonstrated  by  not-
ing  the  magnitude  of  specific  correlations  be-
tween construct  indicators. For example, corre-
lations  among  all  three  interparental  conflict
indicators and all three aggressogenic  cognition
indicators  were  highly  significant  (rs  =  .36  to
.80,  ps  <  .001).  The  correlation  between  par-
ents'  and  teachers'  reports  of  child  aggression
was not as robust as had been expected (r =  .28,
p <  .01). As a result, we examined parents' and
teachers'  reports  of  child  aggression  separately
in  the  following  correlational  and  structural
equation  modeling  analyses.

Consistent  with  the  first  three  hypotheses
generated by the theoretical model and tested in
the  present  study,  an  examination  of  Table  1
shows  that many  of  the correlations  among  the
marital,  cognitive,  and  aggression  variables
were  in  the  expected  directions.

Hypothesis  1: Association  Between
Interparental  Conflict and Child
Aggression

The  first  hypothesis  concerned  the  relation
between interparental  conflict  and child aggres-
sion.  Ratings  of  the  severity  of  interparental
conflict  were  significantly  correlated  in  a posi-
tive direction with the parent-rated child aggres-
sion score (ps <  .05). Interparental conflict  was
marginally  correlated  with  teacher-rated  child
aggressive behavior in two of three correlations.
Thus,  interparental  conflict  as reported  by  both
children  and  parents  was  positively  associated

with  child  aggressive  behavior  as  assessed  by
parents and, to a lesser degree, by teachers  (see
Table  1).

Hypothesis  2: Association  Between
Interparental  Conflict and  Children's
Social  Cognitions

The second hypothesis concerned the relation
between interparental conflict and children's so-
cial  cognitions.  As  expected,  higher  levels  of
interparental  conflict  were  associated  with
higher  levels  of  aggressogenic  cognitions.  All
three  correlations  between  children's  percep-
tions of interparental conflict  and aggressogenic
cognitions  were significant.  Two of six correla-
tions  between  parents'  reports  of  interparental
aggression  and children's  aggressogenic  cogni-
tions  were  marginally  significant.  To  be  spe-
cific,  higher  levels  of  interparental  aggression
perpetuated  both  by  mothers  and  by  fathers
were  marginally  associated  with  an  increased
tendency for children to endorse beliefs  approv-
ing  of  retaliation  (see Table  1).

Hypothesis  3: Association  Between
Children's  Social  Cognitions and Child
Aggression

The  third  hypothesis  concerned  the  relation
between  children's  social  cognitions  and  child
aggression.  Two  of  three  correlations  between
the three aggressogenic  cognitions  and  teacher-
based  aggression  scores  were  significant.  That
is,  teacher-reported  aggression  was  positively
related  to  a  tendency  both  to  endorse  beliefs
approving  of retaliation  and to generate aggres-

Table 1
Intercorrelations  Among  Study  Measures

Variable

1
—

_

1.  CPIC  Properties  Scale 
2.  CTS2  Aggression  (male) 
3.  CTS2  Aggression  (female) 
4.  SIPI 
5.  NOBAGS  Retaliation  Scale 
6.  CATS  Aggression  Scale 
7.  CBCL  Aggression  Scale 
8.  TRF  Aggression  Scale 
Note,  n  =  115 for  all correlations.  CPIC  =  Children's  Perceptions  of  Interparental  Conflict  Scale; CTS2  =
Revised  Conflict  Tactics  Scale;  SIPI  =  social  information-processing  instrument;  NOBAGS  =  Normative
Beliefs  About  Aggression  Scale;  CATS  =  Children's  Action  Tendency  Scale;  CBCL  =  Child  Behavior
Checklist;  TRF  =  Teacher  Report  Form.
tp  <  .10  (marginally  significant). 

.44*** 
.41*** 
.34*** 
.23* 
.34*** 
.22* 
.16t 

.80*** 
.14 
.19t 
.15 
.30** 
.17t 

—
.12
-18f
.02
.34***
.14

* p < . 0 5. 

** p  <  .01.  * * * p < . 0 0 1.

.12 
.14 

—

.28**

.36***
.41***
.09
.28**

.44***
.09
.19*

322

MARCUS,  LINDAHL,  AND  MALIK

sive  responses  to  hypothetical  problems.  Con-
trary to expectations, social cognitions were not
significantly  correlated  with  parent-based  ag-
gression  scores  (see  Table  1).

Structural  Equation  Modeling

In  general,  the  correlations  provided  moder-
ate support for the hypothesized relationships in
the  model.  On  the  basis  of  these  correlational
findings,  structural  equation  modeling  (Ar-
buckle,  1997)  based  on  maximum  likelihood
estimation  was used to present a more complete
assessment  and  description  of  the  relations
among 
interparental  conflict,  aggressogenic
cognitions,  and  child  aggression  by  providing
easily  interpretable  path  diagrams  of  the  inter-
relations  among  sets  of  variables.

In  the  specified  models,  interparental  conflict
was  an exogenous  latent  construct  (i.e., all  of its
causal mechanisms were outside the model). The
indicators  for  interparental  conflict  were  interpa-
rental aggression (i.e., mothers' and fathers' CTS2

(NOBAGS)  and  children's 

scores) and children's perceptions of the intensity,
frequency,  and level of resolution of interparental
conflict (i.e., CPIC Conflict Properties Scale). Ag-
gressogenic cognitions were conceptualized as an
endogenous  latent  construct  consisting  of  three
indicators: children's  normative beliefs  about ag-
gression 
social
problem-solving  strategies  (CATS  and  SIPI).
Child  aggression was conceptualized  as two sep-
arate endogenous manifest variables: child aggres-
sion  at  school  (CBCL-TRF  aggression  scores)
and child aggression at home (i.e., CBCL aggres-
sion  scores). Error  terms  for  indicators  from  the
same  informants  within  and  across  constructs
were  allowed  to  covary  in  order  to  help  control
shared method variance (Kenny & Kashy, 1992).
To  test  the  hypothesis  that  an  aggressogenic
cognitive  style  would  mediate  the  relation  be-
tween  overt marital  conflict  and overt child ag-
gression, we compared two hierarchical models.
As  seen  in  Figure  1,  the  direct  effect  model
tested  the  link  between  interparental  conflict

Interparental

Conflict

Aggressogenic

Cognitive Style

Al

A2

Child

Aggression

At Home

Child

Aggression

at School

Figure  1.  The  conceptual  direct  effects  model.

CHILDREN'S  SOCIAL  COGNITIONS

323

and  child  aggression  at  home  and  at  school
(Paths Al  and A2, respectively) in a model that
also included  a path between  interparental  con-
flict  and  child  aggressogenic  cognitions  (Path
B). The direct paths (Paths Al  and A2) must be
significant  to  establish  that  there  are  effects  to
mediate. The mediation model (Figure 2) added
paths  from  aggressogenic  cognitions  to  child
aggression at home and at school (Paths Cl  and
C2,  respectively),  closing  the  variable  system
and allowing for indirect effects  of interparental
conflict  on  child  aggression  through  aggresso-
genic  cognitions.  If  the  mediation  hypothesis
were correct,  the  mediating  variable  (aggresso-
genic cognitions)  would have nonzero B and C
paths,  the  previously  significant  direct  effects
between  interparental  conflict  and child aggres-
sion  (Paths  Al  and  A2)  would  no  longer  be
significant,  and  the  mediation  model  would fit
the data significantly  better than the direct  effect
model.

The  direct  effect  model  (n  =  115),  depicted
in Figure 3, fit the data adequately, as indicated

by  the  chi-square  statistic,  )f(l2,N=H5) 
=
20.86, p  =  .052, and by goodness-of-fit  indices
(GFIs): GFI  =  .96, adjusted  goodness-of-fit  in-
dex  (AGFI)  = 
.88,  comparative  fit  index
(CFI)  =  .96. The  relative  chi-square  ratio  was
less  than  2.0,  (/ 
-  df  =  \.1A,  N  =  115),
indicating  an  acceptable  fit  for  the  specified
model  (Arbuckle,  1997).  Several  authors  have
suggested  that a conservative  cutoff  for  accept-
able  fit  should  be  less  than  2.0  (Carmines  &
Mclver,  1981; Marsh & Hocevar,  1985), with a
perfect fit producing  a ratio  of  1.0.

The  standardized  path  coefficients  from  in-
terparental  conflict  to  child  aggression  (mea-
sures of the direct, unmediated effect  of  conflict
on  child  aggression)  were  .56  using  parental
reports  of  aggression  and  .23  using teacher  re-
ports;  both  coefficients  differed  significantly
from  zero,  indicating  that  marital  conflict  was
significantly  related to children's aggressive be-
havior both at home and at school. The effect  of
interparental  conflict  on  aggressogenic  cogni-
tions  also  was  statistically  significant.  These

Interparental

Conflict

Child

Aggression

At Home

Cl

C2

Aggressogenic

Cognitive Style

Al

A2

Figure 2.  The conceptual  mediational  model  for  children's  aggressogenic  cognitions.

324

MARCUS,  LINDAHL,  AND  MALIK

Children's

Perceptions of
Interparental

Conflict

Interparental
Aggression by

Females

Child  Aggression

at Home
(CBCL)
R2=.31

Problem-
Solving
(CATS)

Beliefs about
Aggression

Problem-
Solving
(SIPI)

Child Aggression at

School
(TRF)
R2 = .05

Figure  3.  Direct effects  model: Effect  of interparental conflict on child aggression at home and at school.
Coefficients  are standardized path weights. ^(12, N =  115) = 20.86, p  = .052, x2  -H df'=  1.74, GFI = .96,
AGFI  =  .88, CFI  =  .96. CBCL =  Child Behavior Checklist; CATS =  Children's Action Tendency Scale;
SIPI  =  social information-processing  instrument; TRF =  Teacher Report Form. *p < .05.

results  confirm  that  interparental  conflict  has  a
statistically  significant  effect  on  child  aggres-
sion  and  is  the  potential  mediating  variable  in
this  model,  validating  the  further  investigation
of  mediated  effects.

The  mediational  model  (n  =  115),  depicted
in  Figure  4,  fit  the  data  well,  as  indicated  by
chi-square value, ^(lO, N=  115) =  13.69, p  =
.19, x  ~=~  4f—  1-37, and goodness-of-fit  indices
(GFI  =  .97,  AGFI  =  .90,  CFI  =  .98).  The
association  between  interparental  conflict  and
aggressogenic  cognitions  was  marginally  sig-
nificant  (J3 =  .27, p  <  .10), and the association
between  aggressogenic  cognitions  and  chil-
dren's  aggression  in  school  was  significantly
different  from  zero  (/3  =  .35, p  <  .05).

The  addition  of  an  indirect  path  from  inter-
parental  conflict  to  child  aggression  at  school
through  aggressogenic cognitions resulted in an
increase  in  11% total  variance  (R2  =  16% vs.
5%  without  the  indirect  path)  for  children's
aggression  at  school. In  addition,  the direct  ef-
fect  path  from  interparental  conflict  to  school
aggression  (Path  Al),  a  measure  of  the  direct
effect  not  mediated  by  aggressogenic  cogni-

tions,  was  substantially  reduced  and  no  longer
significant  when  the  aggressogenic  cognition
construct  was  included  in  the  model  (j3  =  .13,
ns).  In contrast, the direct link between  interpa-
rental conflict  and parent-reported  child aggres-
sion at home remained significant  (/3 =  .52, p  <
.05) despite the addition of an indirect pathway,
and  there  was  no  increase  in  R2  for  parent-
reported  child  aggression.

The chi-square test of difference  between the
direct  effect  and  mediational  models  yielded  a
statistically  significant  difference,  ^ ( 2,  N  =
115)  =  7.17, p  <  .05. The  mediating  variable
(aggressogenic  cognitions)  had  nonzero  paths
from  interparental  conflict  and  to  teachers'  re-
ports  of  child  aggression.  In  summary:

1. The  mediational  model fit the data  signif-
icantly better  than  did  the direct effects  model,
suggesting  that  the  effect  of  interparental  con-
flict on child aggression was better explained in
the  context  of  aggressogenic  cognitions.

2.  The  inclusion  of  the  mediating  variable,
aggressogenic cognitions, reduced the direct  ef-
fect of interparental conflict on child aggression
at school by 44% ([.23 -  .13]  ^  .23)—in  other

CHILDREN'S  SOCIAL  COGNITIONS

325

Children's

Perceptions of
Interparental

Conflict

Interparental
Aggression by

Females

Child Aggression

at Home
(CBCL)
R2=.3O

.55

.64

.35*

Problem-
Solving
(CATS)

Beliefs about
Aggression

Problem-
Solving
(SIPI)

Figure  4.  Mediational  model:  Effect  of  interparental  conflict  on child  aggression  at home  and at  school
mediated  through  aggressogenic  cognitions.  Coefficients  are standardized  path  weights. ^ ( l O, N  =  115) =
13.69, p  =  .19, x2  + df  =  1.37, GFI =  .97,  AGFI  =  .90, CFI =  .98. CBCL  =  Child  Behavior  Checklist;
CATS  =  Children's  Action  Tendency  Scale;  SIPI  =  Social  information-processing  instrument;  TRF  =
Teacher  Report  Form.  +p  <  .10 (marginally  significant).  *p < .05.

words,  nearly  half  of the effect  of  interparental
conflict  on  child  aggression  at  school  was me-
diated  through  the intervening  variable.  In con-
trast,  the  inclusion  of  the  mediating  variable
reduced the direct effect  of interparental  conflict
on  parents'  reports  of  child  aggression  by  only
7%  ([.56 -  .52]  -  .56).

Post  Hoc  Analyses

Although  the present  study's  primary  objec-
tive  was to examine  how interparental  conflict
and aggressogenic cognitions relate to child ag-
gression,  the  robust  correlation  between  child
aggression  and delinquency  as reported by par-
ents  on the CBCL  (r  =  .61, p  <  .001) and by
teachers on the CBCL-TRF (r =  .63, p <  .001)
necessitated  post  hoc  analyses  to  examine
whether the mediational model would also hold
true  using  the Externalizing  Scale  (a combina-
tion of child aggression and delinquency) as the
outcome  variable.

Interparental  conflict  had  significant  direct
effects  on both parents' and teachers'  reports of
children's externalizing behavior (J3s =  .64 and

.27, ps < .01, respectively), and the direct  effect
model  for  child  externalizing  behavior  (n  =
115) fit the data adequately, as indicated by the
chi-square  statistic,  ^(12, N  =  115) =  20.41,
p =  .06, and goodness-of-fit  indices (GFI = .96,
AGFI=  .88, CFI = .96).

Inclusion  of the mediating  variable,  aggres-
sogenic cognitions, yielded a mediational model
that  also fit the data  well,  as indicated  by the
chi-square  statistic,  ^ ( l O, N  =  115)  =  13.0,
p =  .23, and goodness-of-fit  indices (GFI = .97,
AGFI =  .91, CFI =  .99). The chi-square test of
difference  between  the direct effect  and media-
tional  models  yielded  a  statistically  significant
difference,  x*(2, /V =  115)  =  7.41,  p  <.05,
indicating  that  the  mediational  model  fit  the
data  significantly  better  than  did the direct  ef-
fects  model.  Similar  to  the  pattern  of  results
observed  with the child  aggression  models, in-
clusion  of  the mediating  variable  reduced  the
direct  effect  path  from  interparental  conflict  to
teachers'  reports  of  externalizing  behavior  to
nonsignificance  ()3 =  .16, ns), whereas  the ef-
fect  of interparental  conflict  on parents'  reports

326

MARCUS,  LINDAHL,  AND  MALIK

of  children's  externalizing  behavior  remained
significant  (/3  =  .59, p  <  .05) even  with  inclu-
sion  of  the  aggressogenic  cognition  factor.

On the basis  of  the number of  model  param-
eters,  the  sample  recruited  was  not  sufficiently
large  enough  to  examine  separate  structural
equation  models  for  boys  (n  =  51)  and  girls
(n  =  64;  Kline,  1998).  Instead,  we  conducted
correlational  analyses  separately  for  boys  and
girls  (see Table 2) to examine  whether  the cor-
relations  among  the  construct  indicators  were
consistent  with  the  hypothesized  theoretical
model.  Girls'  results  appear  above  the  main
diagonal, with boys' results appearing below. In
general, results supported the validity of each of
the  major  constructs  included  in  the  theoretical
model  and indicated that for  each gender,  some
of  the  anticipated  relationships  existed  among
the construct  indicators. However,  according to
Cohen (1992), the present sample sizes for each
gender  were  less  than  what  is  necessary  to de-
tect  either  a  small  or  medium  effect  size  for
product-moment  correlation  coefficients  at  .80
power  for  either group; thus, the present corre-
lations should be interpreted with some caution.

Discussion

Correlations  between  marital  conflict  and
child  maladjustment  are  well  established.  The
processes  mediating  these  outcomes,  however,
are  not  yet  understood.

This  investigation  focused  on  the  evaluation
of  a cognitive  style  that  was  expected  to  influ-
ence risk for child aggression. The current study
proposed  a  relation  between  a  specific  dimen-
sion of  interparental  functioning  (overt  interpa-

rental  conflict),  a specific  child  outcome  (overt
aggressive behavior), and a specific  mechanism
that  would mediate  this relation  (aggressogenic
cognitive  style). We expected  that  interparental
conflict  would  indirectly  increase  the  probabil-
ity  of  child  aggression  through  its  relationship
with  children's  social  problem-solving  tactics
and  beliefs  about  aggression.  Aggressogenic
cognitions were thereby expected to be a critical
link  between  interparental  conflict  and  child
aggression. This aggressogenic cognitive model
was based on theoretical and empirical  research
in  the  areas  of  both  marital  conflict  and  child
aggression.

The  results  of  the  present  study  suggest  that
although  interparental  conflict  is  significantly
associated  with  child  aggression  both  at  home
and  in  school,  the  mechanisms  underlying  this
relationship differ  on the basis of the situational
setting. With regard to parents'  reports of child
aggression  at  home,  a  direct  relation  was  ob-
served  between  interparental  conflict  and  child
aggression  that  was  not  mediated  by  aggresso-
genic  cognitions.  One  possible  explanation  for
the  lack  of  mediation  in  child  aggression  at
home  may  be  drawn  from  the  literature  on  the
central role of emotionality  in children's coping
with  marital  conflict.  Davies  and  Cummings
(1994)  posited  an  emotional-security  hypothe-
sis,  in  which  repeated  exposure  to  destructive
marital  conflict  is  viewed  as  an  emotionally
arousing event that induces elevation of arousal
and reduces children's capacity to regulate their
own  emotions  and behavior.  Unregulated  emo-
tional  reactions,  such  as anger,  are in turn pos-
ited to reduce the quality of children's  function-

Table  2
Intercorrelations  Among  Study Measures for  Girls and  Boys

Variable

1
—

.45**
.34*
44**
•24f
.28*
.13
.03

.42***

.45***
.80***

1.  CPIC  Properties  Scale
2.  CTS2  Aggression  (male)
3.  CTS2 Aggression  (female)
4.  SIPI
5.  NOBAGS  Retaliation  Scale
6.  CATS  Aggression  Scale
7.  CBCL  Aggression  Scale
8.  TRF  Aggression  Scale
Note.  For  girls,  n  =  64,  above  the  diagonal;  for  boys,  n  =  51, below  the  diagonal.  CPIC  =  Children's
Perceptions  of  Interparental  Conflict  Scale;  CTS2  =  Revised  Conflict  Tactics  Scale;  SIPI  =  social
information-processing  instrument;  NOBAGS  =  Normative  Beliefs  About  Aggression  Scale;  CATS  =
Children's  Action  Tendency  Scale; CBCL  =  Child  Behavior  Checklist; TRF  =  Teacher  Report  Form.
f p  <  .10 (marginally  significant).  * p < . 0 5.  ** p  <  .01.  *** p  < .001.

.82***
.21
.17
.20
-.03
.15

.27*
.50***
45***
.05
.11
.22

.42**
.08
.02
.43***
.47***

.23t
.19
.16
.19

.41**
.06
.32*

.28*
.06
.08

.50***
39***
AA
.36**

.17
.22
.02
.12
.14

.27*
.18
.16
.16
.04
.11
.31*

.00
.10

.24t

CHILDREN'S  SOCIAL  COGNITIONS

327

ing  and  potentially  induce  aggressive  coping
responses.  As  a consequence,  child  aggression
at  home  might  best  be  interpreted  as  a  poten-
tially  maladaptive  mechanism  by  which  chil-
dren  discharge  tension  and  emotional  arousal
evoked  from  witnessing  intense,  emotionally
laden interparental  conflict.  The role of aggres-
sogenic  cognitions  may  be  less  central  as  an
immediate  mediator  than  emotional  security
within  this emotionally  charged  home  context.
However,  in  contrast  to  the  conflictual  and
hostile  home  setting  that  is  likely  to  induce
emotional  arousal  and  unregulated  behavior,
school  presumably  provides  a  less  conflictual
environment  in  which  to evaluate  a child's  be-
havior. After all, the interparental conflict that is
hypothesized  to  evoke  arousal  and  potentiate
child  aggression  is not present  in an  immediate
sense.  And  yet,  a  direct  relation  continues  to
exist between interparental conflict  at home and
child  aggression  at  school,  suggesting  that  fac-
tors  other  than  immediate  emotional  arousal
may  serve as mechanisms  through  which  inter-
parental  conflict  has  its  effects  on  school
behavior.

In  fact,  the  present  findings  are  consistent
with  the hypothesis  that one effect  of  exposure
to  interparental  conflict  is  to  shape  children's
social information-processing  skills and norma-
tive beliefs  about aggression. The results of the
present  study  suggest  that  children  exposed  to
interparental conflict may acquire a repertoire of
highly  accessible  aggressive responses  to inter-
personal  problems  and  develop  a  set  of  beliefs
that  support  aggression  as  a  normative  and  le-
gitimate  response  to provocation.  Although  the
impact  of  these  distorted  cognitions  may  be
subsumed  at  home  by  the  child's  emotional
arousal  during  exposure  to  conflict,  these  cog-
nitive patterns appear to take on a stronger role
in influencing  how the child behaves in  school,
where  the  immediacy  of  the  interparental  con-
flict  and  its  concomitant  emotional  arousal  is
removed.

Although  caution  is  warranted  in  inferring
causal relationships on the basis of correlational
data, the findings  of the present  study  support a
mediating role of children's aggressogenic cog-
nitions in the link between interparental  conflict
and  children's  school  aggression.  Evidence
from  the  present  study  suggests  that  about  half
of  the  empirical  effect  of  exposure  to  interpa-
rental conflict  on child aggression  at school can

be  accounted  for  by  aggressogenic  cognitions.
Thus, aggression  at school appears to be poten-
tiated,  at  least  in  part,  by  the  development  of
distorted  social  information-processing  and be-
lief patterns in response  to witnessing  frequent,
intense,  and unresolved  interparental  conflict.

Regarding the hypothesized  relation  between
interparental  conflict  and  children's  aggresso-
genic  cognitions,  it  is  important  to  note  that
although  a  significant  association  was  found
between  child-reported  conflict  and  children's
aggressogenic  cognitions,  the  relation  between
parent-reported  conflict  and  children's  aggres-
sogenic  cognitions  was  weaker.  This  discrep-
ancy  raises  the  possibility  that  children  who
exhibit  approving  beliefs  about  aggression  and
deficits in social problem-solving may be biased
toward  perceiving  their parents'  relationship  as
highly  conflictual.  Such  a  negative  bias  might
thereby  inflate  estimates  of  the  correlation  be-
tween  marital  conflict  and  children's  aggresso-
genic  cognitions.  However,  this  discrepancy
may  also be  interpreted  as  supportive  evidence
for  the  insufficiency  of  relying  on  parental  re-
ports  of  marital  conflict  when  examining  mari-
tal  conflict's  influence  on  children  (Grych  &
Fincham,  1990).  For  interparental  conflict  to
shape  children's  knowledge  structures  and  the
manner  in  which  children  process  and  respond
to social interactions, what may be paramount is
not the  actual  level  of  interparental  conflict  per
se  but,  rather,  the  degree  to  which  children
perceive  their  parents'  relationship  as  conflic-
tual. This finding is in keeping  with  Grych  and
Fincham's  (1990)  contention  that because chil-
dren  actively  interpret  and  respond  to their  en-
vironment, it is perhaps most critical to examine
children's  appraisals  of  interparental  conflict
when  attempting  to  understand  its  impact  on
them. In particular,  Grych  and Fincham  (1990)
posited  that  marital  conflict  perceived  by  chil-
dren to be intense, frequent,  and poorly resolved
is  likely  to  represent  a  significant  stressor  for
children  and  to be  highly  associated  with  child
problems.  The  present  findings  indicate  that
perceptions  of this type of interparental  conflict
may be negatively associated not only with chil-
dren's behavior, as predicted by Grych and Fin-
cham  (1990),  but  also  with  children's  social
cognitions.

The lack of a more robust relationship in this
study  between  children's  aggressogenic  cogni-
tions  and  child  aggression,  particularly  as  re-

328

MARCUS,  LINDAHL,  AND MALIK

ported  by  parents,  warrants  attention  and  ap-
pears  to  contradict  the  findings  of  previous
studies  linking  social  cognitions  with  child  ag-
gression (e.g., Asarnow & Callan,  1985; Deluty,
1981;  Huesmann  & Guerra,  1997; Lochman  &
Dodge,  1994; Pettit  et al.,  1988; Quiggle et al.,
1992; Richard & Dodge,  1982; Slaby & Guerra,
1988).  One  possible  explanation  for  this  dis-
crepancy  is  the  type  of  sample  studied.  Past
research  on  aggressogenic  cognitions  has  fo-
cused  primarily  on  clinical  samples  of  children
and  adolescents  (e.g.,  Slaby  &  Guerra,  1988;
Huesmann & Guerra,  1997; Lochman & Dodge,
1994; Pettit et al.,  1991; Lochman, Lampron, &
Rabiner,  1989).  In  contrast,  the  current  study
used  a community  sample of children  with rel-
atively  low,  nonclinical  levels  of  aggression.
Because  research  indicates  that  the relation  be-
tween  aggression  and aggressogenic  cognitions
becomes  more  robust  as the  severity  of aggres-
sion increases (Lochman  & Dodge,  1994; Slaby
&  Guerra,  1988),  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the
strength  of  the  correlations  between  these  two
constructs  would  be  less  strong  in  the  present
community  sample  than  in  previous  clinical
samples.

limitations.  First, 

The findings from  the  present  study  must  be
interpreted  in  the  context  of  certain  method-
ological 
the  associations
among  variables  in  the  present  study  were  not
particularly  robust.  What has  been  presented  is
a  plausible  scenario  in  which  perceptions  of
interparental  conflict  may  exert  an  effect  on
child  aggression  by  means  of  their  effects  on
children's  social  cognitions,  but  these  linkages
were  modest  in  size,  leaving  room  for  many
other sources of influences on children's aggres-
sogenic  cognitions  and,  ultimately,  child
aggression.

In  addition  to  modest  relations  among  the
variables,  the  use  of  correlational  and  cross-
sectional  data  to  examine  causal  mechanisms
opens  this  study  to the  criticisms  that  often  are
made of nonexperimental research. Only exper-
imental  designs  can  decisively  demonstrate
cause, and it is not possible to randomly  assign
children  to conflictual  home environments. The
use  of  structural  equation  modeling  enhances
the  capacity  to  statistically  predict  phenomena,
and  the  current  data  indicate  that  some  direct
and indirect links exist between marital  conflict,
aggressogenic  cognitions, and child  aggression.
Causal  links,  however,  cannot  be  determined.

As  a result,  although  the  aggressogenic  cog-
nition model suggests that parents'  conflicts  are
directly  related  to children's  aggressive  behav-
ior, and it is plausible to interpret this finding  as
indicative  of  interparental  conflict  influencing
and  shaping  child  aggression,  it  is  also  impor-
tant  to consider  other possible  directions  of  ef-
fect  in  the  data  presented.  For  example,  it  is
possible that child behavior problems could cre-
ate  a difficult  home  atmosphere,  which  in  turn
could  lead  to  marital  conflict.  Longitudinal
analysis of the mechanisms  hypothesized  in the
theoretical  model  would  improve  the  confi-
dence  with  which  one  could  make  causal
inferences.

that 

interparental  conflict 

Another limitation of the present study is that
the  sample  recruited  was  not  sufficiently  large
enough  to examine  separate  structural  equation
models  for  boys  versus  girls, despite the possi-
bility  that the association  between  interparental
conflict  and child aggression  may vary  depend-
ing on child gender. Although  some research on
children  exposed  to  marital  conflict  has  indi-
cated  no  significant  gender  differences  (e.g.,
Dadds  &  Powell,  1991),  other  studies  have
found 
is  more
strongly  related  to externalizing  and  aggressive
behaviors in boys (Cummings, Davies, & Simp-
son,  1994;  Hart  et  al.,  1998;  Osborne  &  Fin-
cham,  1996).  However,  this  gender  disparity
may  be  due,  at  least  in  part,  to  boys'  overall
higher  rates  of  overt  aggressive  behavior
(Block,  1983;  Block,  Block,  &  Gjerde,  1986;
Patterson,  1982)  and  aggressive-encouraging
cognitions  (Perry,  Perry,  &  Weiss,  1989),  as
opposed to boys' greater vulnerability to marital
conflict  per  se. The  correlational  analyses  pre-
sented for boys versus girls in the present study
suggest  that  some  of  the  anticipated  relation-
ships  exist  among  the  construct  indicators  for
each  gender,  but  such  correlations  must  be  in-
terpreted with caution because of the small sam-
ple size.

In a similar manner, the small sample size of
the present  study  did not allow  structural  equa-
tion  modeling  to  be  conducted  separately  by
ethnicity. Because over 50% of the present sam-
ple  was  Hispanic,  caution  is  warranted  regard-
ing  the  generalizability  of  our  findings  among
other  ethnic  groups.  It  is  clear  that  future  re-
search  with  larger  samples  should  investigate
how the present mediational  model fits the data
for  boys  versus  girls  and  for  different  cultural,

CHILDREN'S  SOCIAL  COGNITIONS

329

ethnic,  and racial  groups  before  the  present  re-
sults  can  be  generalized  across  different  popu-
lations  with  confidence.

reactive 

In  addition,  with  the  particular  type  of  ag-
gression  selected  (overt  aggression)  and  the
measures  used  (Achenbach  questionnaires),  it
was  not  possible  in  the  present  study  to  distin-
guish between  whether  a child's  aggressive be-
havior  was  proactive  (i.e.,  instrumental  or  de-
liberately  goal-directed)  or 
(i.e.,
defensively  responding  to  perceived  provoca-
tion  or  threat;  Dodge  &  Coie,  1987),  despite
recent research indicating that different  forms of
aggression are likely to have different  etiologies
(Dodge  &  Coie,  1987)  and 
that  social
information-processing  mechanisms  may  be
specific  to  particular  subtypes  of  aggression
(Crick  &  Dodge,  1996;  Dodge  &  Coie,  1987;
Smithmyer,  Hubbard,  &  Simons,  2000).  As  a
result,  it  would  be  particularly  interesting  in
future  research to examine how the present me-
diational  model  might  relate  differentially  to
specific  subtypes  of  child  aggression.

Finally,  although  over  three-fourths  of  the
present sample consisted of children from  intact
families  (i.e., both natural parents in the home),
the  inclusion  of  step-families  suggests  that
some of the children  in the present  sample may
have endured  previously  high  levels of  interpa-
rental  conflict  culminating  in  divorce.  Consis-
tent  with  a  cumulative  stress  explanation
(O'Leary  & Emery,  1984), the relations  among
interparental  conflict,  aggressogenic  cognitions,
and  child  aggression  may  be  stronger  among
children  exposed  in  the  past  to  high  levels  of
interparental  conflict  or whose divorced  parents
are  currently  experiencing  conflict.  Although
beyond  the  scope  of  the  present  study,  exami-
nation of how a child's past history  of exposure
to  conflictual  parental  relationships  (including
severity,  chronicity,  and  duration  of  prior  con-
flict)  might 
the  relations  among
present  levels  of  interparental  conflict,  aggres-
sogenic  cognitions,  and child  aggression  repre-
sents  a rich  area  for  future  inquiry.

influence 

Despite the presented  limitations, the present
study also addresses several shortcomings in the
current  research  on  interparental  conflict  and
child  aggression. A clear strength of this inves-
tigation  is  the  use  of  a  multi-informant,  multi-
indicator  design.  Data  were  obtained  from
mothers,  fathers,  teachers,  and  children,  in-
creasing  confidence  that  these  findings  are  less

likely  to  be  affected  by  method  variance  con-
founds  (Lorenz,  Conger,  Simons, Whitbeck,  &
Elder,  1991). The present findings also illustrate
the benefits  of  examining  interparental  conflict,
aggressogenic  cognitions,  and  child  aggression
in  one  model  by  means  of  structural  equation
modeling,  rather  than  as  isolated  effects.  The
effects  described  earlier  would  not  have  been
discernible  if  only  specific  relations  (e.g.,  im-
pact  of  interparental  conflict  on  aggressogenic
cognitions)  were  examined  in  isolation.

The results of this investigation also highlight
the importance  of measuring  children's percep-
tions of conflict  and of focusing  on  dimensions
of  conflict  known  to be  distressing  to  children.
Research  indicates  that  children's  perceptions
of interparental  conflict  are a stronger predictor
of  child  adjustment  than  parental  reports  (Em-
ery  & O'Leary,  1982; Grych  et  al.,  1992), and
that children's perceptions of interparental  con-
flict  are  significantly  related  to  judgments  of
children's  adjustment  not  only  by  parents,  but
also by teachers and peers  (Grych  et al.,  1992).
Despite  these  findings,  the  preponderance  of
research on interparental  conflict  and child  out-
come  has  relied  heavily  on  parental  reports  of
conflict  (e.g., Dadds & Powell,  1991; Hart et al.,
1998; O'Brien,  Margolin,  & John,  1995; Ross-
man  &  Rosenberg,  1992).  Although  parents
may provide a relatively  accurate assessment of
the level  of  interparental  conflict,  they  may  not
recognize  to  what  extent  their  children  have
witnessed  and  processed 
the  conflict.  The
present  study  supports  the  utility  of  examining
children's  appraisals  of  marital  conflict  and
adds  to  a growing  number  of  studies  that  doc-
ument  increased  understanding  of  the  associa-
tion  between  marital  conflict  and  child  adjust-
ment through  the  study  of  children's  appraisals
(e.g.,  Cummings  et  al.,  1994;  Grych  et  al.,
1992).

In  conclusion,  although  years  of  research
have  established  a relation  between  interparen-
tal conflict  and child adjustment  problems (e.g.,
Emery,  1982; Long & Forehand,  1987; O'Leary
&  Emery,  1984),  relatively  few  models  have
tested  mechanisms  to  account  for  this  associa-
tion.  This  study  tested  a  model  that  specified
children's  social  problem-solving  deficits  and
distorted  beliefs  about  aggression  as  mecha-
nisms linking interparental conflict  to children's
aggression.  Support  was  found  for  the  mediat-
ing effects  of aggressogenic  cognitions  on chil-

330

MARCUS,  LINDAHL,  AND  MALIK

dren's  school  aggression  but  not  on  children's
aggression  at  home,  suggesting  that  different
mechanisms  may  underlie  the relation  between
interparental  conflict  and  child  aggression  de-
pending  on  environmental  context.

Implications  for  Application

and  Public  Policy

The  findings  from  the  present  study  have
practical  implications  for  clinical  work  with
children  exposed  to high  levels  of  interparental
conflict.  Interventions  for  children  from  highly
conflictual  households  typically  focus  on  the
child's  internalizing  or externalizing  behavioral
symptoms  and  overall  psychological  adjust-
ment. The results of this study  suggest that it is
also  important  for  practitioners  to  address  the
impact  of  exposure  to  interparental  conflict  on
children's  social  cognitions.  Intervention  pro-
grams  with  children  exposed  to  high  levels  of
interparental  conflict  should  include a thorough
assessment of children's social  problem-solving
strategies  and  normative  beliefs  about  aggres-
sion,  given  that  our  study  found  links  between
exposure  to  interparental  conflict  and  these  so-
cial cognitions. Those children  found  to exhibit
aggressogenic cognitive styles may benefit  from
social  cognitive  skills training programs  similar
to the  skills  training  programs  designed  specif-
ically  for  aggressive  children  (Bierman  & Fur-
man,  1984;  Lochman  &  Curry,  1986).  Such
cognitive interventions could be of considerable
benefit  in helping  children  who have  witnessed
their  parents'  ineffective  and  destructive  meth-
ods  of  resolving  conflict  learn  how  to  develop
prosocial  solutions  to  interpersonal  problems,
interpret  peer  cues  accurately,  and  reduce  ac-
ceptance of the legitimacy  of aggression. On the
basis  of  the  success  of  these  types  of  skills
training  programs  in  reducing  child  aggressive
behavior  (Bierman  & Furman,  1984;  Lochman
&  Curry,  1986),  implementing  this  treatment
approach  could be expected to have a meaning-
ful  impact  not  only  in  modifying  the aggresso-
genic  cognitions  and  maladaptive  beliefs  of
children  exposed  to high  levels  of  conflict,  but
also  in  reducing  their  aggressive  behavior.  In
summary,  the present  research  supports the no-
tion 
intervention
strategies  that focus  on  facilitating  reduction of
aggressogenic  cognitions  may  help  to  reduce
the  deleterious  impact  of  exposure  to  interpa-

that  social-cognitive-based 

rental 
behavior.

conflict 

on 

children's 

aggressive

References

Achenbach,  T.  M.  (1991).  Manual  for  the  Child
Behavior  Checklist  and  1991  Profile.  Burlington:
University  of  Vermont,  Department  of  Psychiatry.
Arbuckle,  J.  L.  (1997). Amos  users'  guide:  Version

3.6. Chicago: SPSS.

Asarnow,  J.  R.,  &  Callan,  J.  W.  (1985).  Boys  with
peer  adjustment  problems:  Social  cognitive  pro-
cesses. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 53,  80-87.

Bandura,  A.  (1973).  Aggression:  A  social  learning
theory  analysis.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ:  Prentice-
Hall.

Bierman, K. A., & Furman, W. F. (1984). The  effects
of social skills training and peer involvement on the
social  adjustment  of  preadolescents.  Child  Devel-
opment,  55,  1465-1478.

Block,  J.  H.  (1983).  Differential  premises  arising
from  differential  socialization  of  the  sexes:  Some
conjectures.  Child Development,  58, 487-498.

Block,  J.  H.,  Block,  J.,  &  Gjerde,  P.  J.  (1986).  The
personality  of  children  prior  to  divorce.  Child De-
velopment,  57,  827-840.

Carmines, E. G.,  & Mclver,  J.  P.  (1981).  Analyzing
models with unobserved variables. In G. W. Bohrn-
stedt & E. F. Borgotta  (Eds.), Social  measurement:
Current issues. Beverly  Hills, CA: Sage.

Cohen,  J.  (1992).  A  power  primer.  Psychological

Bulletin,  112,  155-159.

Coie, J. D., & Dodge, K. A. (1998). Aggression  and
antisocial behavior. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N.
Eisenberg  (Vol.  Ed.), Handbook  of  child  psychol-
ogy:  Volume 3. Social,  emotional,  and  personality
development  (5th  ed.,  pp.  779-862).  New  York:
Wiley.

Coie, J. D., & Kupersmidt, J. B. (1983). A behavioral
analysis  of  emerging  social  status in boys'  groups.
Child Development,  54,  1400-1416.

Conway Data, Inc. (2000). County data: Dade, Florida.
GeoFacts  Demographics  Library  [Information  on
line]. Retrieved  September  30, 2000 from the World
Wide Web:  http://www.conway.com.geofacts.

Crick,  N.  R.,  Casas,  J.  F.,  &  Mosher,  M.  (1997).
Relational  and  overt  aggression  in  preschool.  De-
velopmental  Psychology,  33,  579-588.

Crick,  N.  R.,  &  Dodge,  K.  A.  (1996).  Social
information-processing  mechanisms in reactive and
proactive aggression.  Child Development,  67, 993-
1002.

Cummings,  E.  M.  (1987).  Coping  with  background
anger  in  early  childhood.  Child  Development,  58,
976-984.

Cummings, E. M., & Davies, P. T. (1994). Children
and  marital  conflict:  The  impact  of family  dispute
and  resolution.  New  York:  Guilford  Press.

CHILDREN'S  SOCIAL  COGNITIONS

331

Cummings,  E.  M.,  Davies, P. T.,  & Simpson,  K.  S.
(1994). Marital  conflict,  gender,  and children's  ap-
praisals  and  coping  efficacy  as  mediators  of  child
adjustment.  Journal  of Family Psychology, 8,  141—
149.

Cummings, E. M., Iannotti, R. J., & Zahn-Waxier, C.
(1985). The influence  of conflict  between  adults on
the  emotions  and  aggression  of  young  children.
Developmental  Psychology,  21, 495-507.

Cummings,  E.  ML,  Zahn-Waxler,  C,  &  Radke-
Yarrow, M. (1984). Developmental changes in chil-
dren's  reactions  to  anger  in  the  home.  Journal  of
Child Psychology  and Psychiatry,  25,  63-74.

Dadds, M. R., & Powell, M. B. (1991). The relation-
ship  of  interparental  conflict  and  global  marital
adjustment  to  aggression,  anxiety,  and  immaturity
in  aggressive  and  nonclinic  children.  Journal  of
Abnormal  Child Psychology,  19, 553-567.

Davies,  P.  T.,  &  Cummings,  E.  M.  (1994).  Marital
conflict  and  child  adjustment:  An  emotional  secu-
rity  hypothesis.  Psychological  Bulletin,  116,  387-
411.

Deluty,  R.  H.  (1979).  Children's  Action  Tendency
Scale: A self-report  measure  of  aggressiveness, as-
sertiveness,  and  submissiveness  in  children.  Jour-
nal  of  Consulting  and  Clinical  Psychology,  47,
1061-1071.

Deluty,  R.  H.  (1981). Alternative-thinking  ability  of
aggressive,  assertive,  and  submissive  children.
Cognitive  Therapy and Research,  5,  309-312.

Deluty,  R.  H.  (1983).  Children's  evaluations  of  ag-
gressive, assertive, and submissive responses. Jour-
nal  of  Clinical  Child Psychology,  12,  124-129.

Deluty, R. H. (1985). Cognitive mediation of aggres-
sive, assertive, and submissive behavior in children.
International  Journal  of Behavioral  Development,
51,  162-170.

Dodge,  K.  A.,  Bates,  J.  E.,  &  Pettit,  G.  S.  (1990).
Mechanisms  in the cycle of violence. Science, 250,
1678-1683.

Dodge,  K.  A.,  &  Coie,  J.  D.  (1987).  Social-
information-processing  factors  in reactive and pro-
active aggression in children's peer groups. Journal
of  Personality  and  Social  Psychology,  53,  1146-
1158.

Dodge, K. A., Pettit, G. S., Bates, J. E., & Valente, E.
(1995). Social  information-processing  patterns par-
tially  mediate the effect  of early  physical  abuse on
later  conduct  problems.  Journal  of Abnormal  Psy-
chology,  104, 632-643.

Dodge,  K.  A.,  Price,  J.  M.,  Bachorowski,  J.  A.,  &
Newman, J. R. (1990). Hostile attributional  tenden-
cies  in  severely  aggressive  adolescents. Journal of
Abnormal  Psychology,  99,  385-392.

Emery,  R.  E.  (1982). Interparental  conflict  and  chil-
dren of discord and divorce. Psychological Bulletin,
92,  310-330.

Emery,  R.  E.,  & O'Leary,  K.  D.  (1982).  Children's
perceptions of marital discord  and behavioral prob-

lems  of  boys  and  girls.  Abnormal  Child  Psychol-
ogy,  10,  11-24.

Farrington,  D.  P.  (1991).  Childhood  aggression  and
adult  violence:  Early  precursors  and  later  life  out-
comes. In  J.  D.  Pepler  &  K.  H. Rubin  (Eds.), The
development and treatment of childhood aggression
(pp. 5-30).  Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum.

Farrington, D. P. (1995). The development of  offend-
ing  and  antisocial  behavior  from  childhood:  Key
findings from  the  Cambridge  Study  in  Delinquent
Development.  Journal  of  Child  Psychology  and
Psychiatry,  36,  929-964.

Fauber,  R.  L.,  & Long,  N.  (1991).  Children  in  con-
text: The role of the family  in child  psychotherapy.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59,
813-820.

Fincham, F. D. (1994). Understanding the association
between  marital  conflict  and  child  adjustment:
Overview.  Journal  of Family  Psychology,  8,  123-
127.

Forman,  S.  G.  (1980). Self-statements  of  aggressive
and  nonaggressive  children.  Child Behavior  Ther-
apy, 2,  49-60.

Goodman,  S.  H.,  Barfoot,  B., Frye,  A.  A.,  &  Belli,
A.  M.  (1999).  Dimensions  of  marital  conflict  and
children's  social problem-solving  skills. Journal of
Family Psychology,  13, 33-45.

Groisser,  D.  (1986).  Child  witness  to  interpersonal
violence: Social problem  solving skills  and behav-
ioral adjustment. Unpublished master's thesis, Uni-
versity  of  Denver,  Denver,  CO.

Grych, J. H., & Fincham, F. D. (1990). Marital con-
flict  and  children's  adjustment:  A  cognitive-
contextual framework.  Psychological Bulletin, 108,
267-290.

Grych,  J.  H.,  &  Fincham,  F.  D.  (1993).  Children's
appraisals  of  marital  conflict:  Initial  investigations
of  the  cognitive-contextual  framework.  Child De-
velopment, 64,  215-230.

Grych,  J.  H.,  Seid,  M.,  &  Fincham,  F.  D.  (1992).
Assessing marital conflict  from  the child's perspec-
tive:  The  Children's  Perception  of  Interparental
Conflict  Scale.  Child Development,  63,  558-572.

Guerra,  N.  G.,  Huesmann,  L.  R.,  Tolan,  P.  H.,  Van
Acker,  R.,  &  Eron,  L.  D.  (1995).  Stressful  events
and  individual  beliefs  as  correlates  of  economic
disadvantage and aggression among urban children.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63,
518-528.

Guerra,  N.  G.,  &  Slaby,  R.  G.  (1990).  Cognitive
mediators of aggression in adolescent offenders:  II.
Intervention. Developmental  Psychology,  26,  269-
277.

Haapasalo, J.,  & Tremblay,  R. E.  (1994). Physically
aggressive  boys  from  ages  6  to  12: Family  back-
ground,  parenting  behavior,  and  prediction  of  de-
linquency. Journal  of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology, 62,  1044-1052.

Hart,  C.  H., Nelson,  D.  A.,  Robinson,  C.  C,  Olsen,

332

MARCUS,  LINDAHL,  AND  MALIK

S. F., & McNeilly-Choque, M. K. (1998). Overt and
relational aggression  in Russian  nursery-school-age
children:  Parenting  style  and  marital  linkages. De-
velopmental  Psychology,  34,  687-697.

Huesmann,  L. R.,  Eron,  L. D., Lefkowitz,  M. M., &
Walder,  L.  O.  (1984).  Stability  of  aggression  over
time  and  generations.  Developmental  Psychology,
20,  1120-1134.

Huesmann, L. R., & Guerra, N. G. (1997). Children's
normative  beliefs  about  aggression  and  aggressive
behavior.  Journal  of  Personality  and  Social  Psy-
chology,  72, 408-419.

Huesmann,  L. R., Guerra,  N. G., Miller, L., & Zelli,
A.  (1992).  The  role  of  social  norms  in  the  devel-
opment of aggression. In H. Zumkley & A. Fraczek
(Eds.), Socialization and aggression (pp. 139-151).
New  York:  Springer-Verlag.

Jaffe,  P., Wilson, S., & Wolfe, D. A. (1986). Promot-
ing changes  in  attitudes  and  understanding  of  con-
flict  resolution  among  child  witnesses  of  family
violence.  Canadian Journal  of Behavioral  Science,
18, 356-366.

Jenkins, J.  M.,  &  Smith,  M.  A.  (1991).  Marital  dis-
harmony  and  children's  behavioral  problems:  As-
pects  of  a  poor  marriage  that  affect  children  ad-
versely.  Journal  of  Child  Psychology  and
Psychiatry,  32,  793-810.

Kenny, D. A., & Kashy, D. A. (1992). Analysis of the
multitrait-multimethod  matrix by confirmatory  fac-
tor analysis. Psychological  Bulletin,  112,  165-172.
Kline, R. B. (1998). Principles and practice  of struc-
tural  equation  modeling.  New  York:  Guilford
Press.

Lindahl,  K. M. (1998). Family  process  variables  and
children's disruptive behavior problems. Journal of
Family Psychology,  12, 420-436.

Lindahl,  K.  M.,  &  Malik,  N.  M.  (1999).  Marital
conflict,  family  processes,  and  boys'  externalizing
behavior 
in  Hispanic  American  and  European
American  families.  Journal  of  Clinical  Child Psy-
chology,  28,  12-24.

Lochman,  J.  E.,  &  Curry,  J.  F.  (1986).  Effects  of
social problem-solving  training and  self-instruction
training  with  aggressive  boys. Journal  of  Clinical
Child Psychology,  15,  159-164.

Lochman,  J.  E.,  &  Dodge,  K.  A.  (1994).  Social-
cognitive processes of severely  violent,  moderately
aggressive,  and  nonaggressive  boys.  Journal  of
Consulting and  Clinical Psychology,  62,  366-374.
Lochman, J. E., & Lampron, L. B. (1986). Situational
social  problem-solving  skills  and  self-esteem  of
aggressive  and nonaggressive  boys. Journal  of Ab-
normal  Child Psychology,  14, 605-617.

Lochman,  J.  E.,  Lampron,  L.  B.,  &  Rabiner,  D.  L.
(1989).  Format  and  salience  effects  in  the  social
problem-solving  of  aggressive  and  nonaggressive
boys.  Journal  of  Clinical  Child  Psychology,  18,
230-236.

Long,  N.,  &  Forehand,  R.  (1987).  The  effects  of

parental  divorce  and  parental  conflict  on  children:
An  overview.  Journal  of  Developmental  and  Be-
havioral  Pediatrics,  8,  292-296.

Lorenz,  F.  O.,  Conger,  R.  D.,  Simons,  R.  L.,  Whit-
beck,  L. B.,  & Elder,  G.  H., Jr.  (1991).  Economic
pressure  and  marital  quality:  An  illustration  of  the
method  variance  problem  in  the  causal  model  of
family  process. Journal  of Marriage  and the Fam-
ily, 53, 375-388.

Marsh, H. W., & Hocevar, D. (1985). Application of
confirmatory  factor  analysis  to  the  study  of  self-
concept:  First-  and higher-order  factor  models  and
their  invariance  across  groups.  Psychological  Bul-
letin,  97, 562-582.

McClaskey, C. L. (1988). Symptoms of ADHD, ADD,
and  aggression  in children:  Teacher  ratings,  peer
sociometrics, and judgments  of hypothetical behav-
ior. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Indiana Uni-
versity.

McCord,  W.,  & McCord,  J.  (1960).  Origins of alco-

holism.  Stanford,  CA:  Stanford  University  Press.

McNeilly-Choque,  M.  K.,  Hart,  C.  H.,  Robinson,
C. C,  Nelson,  L. J.,  & Olsen,  S.  F.  (1996).  Overt
and  relational  aggression  on  the  playground:  Cor-
respondence  among  different  informants.  Journal
of Research  in  Childhood Education,  11,  41-61.

Milich,  R.,  & Dodge,  K. A.  (1984). Social  informa-
tion  processing  in  child  psychiatric  populations.
Journal  of Abnormal  Child  Psychology,  12,  471—
490.

O'Brien,  M.,  Margolin,  G.,  &  John,  R.  S.  (1995).
Relation  among  marital  conflict,  child  coping,  and
child  adjustment.  Journal  of  Clinical  Child  Psy-
chology, 24,  346-361.

Office  of  Educational  Evaluation  and  Management
Analysis.  (1999,  March).  1998-99  book  all  about
Miami-Dade County public schools  [Book on-line].
Retrieved  September  24,  2000  from  the  World
Wide  Web:  http://www.dade.kl2.fl.us.

O'Leary,  K.  D.,  &  Emery,  R.  E.  (1984).  Marital
discord  and  child  behavior  problems.  In  M.  D.
Levine  & P.  Satz  (Eds.), Developmental  variation
and  dysfunction  (pp.  345-364).  New  York:  Aca-
demic  Press.

Osborne,  L.  A.,  &  Fincham,  F.  D.  (1996).  Marital
conflict,  parent-child  relationships,  and  child  ad-
justment:  Does  gender  matter?  Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 42, 48-75.

Patterson,  G.  R.  (1982).  Coercive  family  process.

Eugene, OR:  Castalia  Press.

Perry, D. G., Perry, L. C,  & Weiss, R. J. (1989). Sex
differences  in the consequences that children antic-
ipate  for  aggression.  Developmental  Psychology,
25,  312-319.

Pettit, G. S., Dodge, K. A., & Brown, M. M. (1988).
Early  family  experience,  social  problem  solving
patterns,  and  children's  social  competence.  Child
Development,  59,  107-120.

Pettit,  G.  S.,  Harrist,  A.  W.,  Bates, J.  E.,  & Dodge,

CHILDREN'S  SOCIAL  COGNITIONS

333

K.  A.  (1991).  Family  interaction,  cognition,  and
children's  subsequent  relations  with  peers  at kin-
dergarten. Journal of Social and Personal Relation-
ships, 8, 383-402.

Quiggle, N. L., Garber,  J., Panak,  W. F., & Dodge,
K. A. (1992). Social  information  processing  in ag-
gressive  and  depressed  children.  Child  Develop-
ment, 63, 1305-1320.

Rabiner,  D., Lenhart,  L., & Lochman,  J. E. (1990).
Automatic  versus reflective  social  problem-solving
in  popular,  average,  and rejected  children.  Devel-
opmental  Psychology, 26, 1010-1016.

Richard, B. A., & Dodge, K. A. (1982). Social mal-
adjustment  and  problem  solving  in  school-aged
children.  Journal  of  Consulting  and Clinical Psy-
chology, 50, 226-233.

Robins, L. N. (1966). Deviant  children grown  up: A
sociological  and psychiatric  study  of  sociopathic
personality.  Baltimore: Williams  & Wilkins.

Rosenberg, M. S. (1987). Children of battered  wom-
en:  The  effects  of  witnessing  violence  on  their
social  problem-solving  abilities.  The  Behavior
Therapist,  4, 85-89.

Rossman,  B.  B.  R.,  &  Rosenberg,  M.  S.  (1992).
Family stress and functioning  in children: The mod-
erating effects  of children's beliefs  about their con-
trol  over  parental  conflict.  Journal  of  Child Psy-
chology and Psychiatry, 33, 699-715.

Slaby,  R.  G.,  &  Guerra,  N.  G.  (1988).  Cognitive
mediators of aggression in adolescent  offenders:  1.
Assessment.  Developmental  Psychology,  24,  580-
588.

Smithmyer,  C. M., Hubbard, J. A., & Simons, R.  F.
(2000).  Journal  of Clinical  Child  Psychology, 29,
86-93.

Straus,  M.  A.,  Gelles,  R.  J.,  &  Steinmetz,  S. K.
(1980). Behind closed doors: Violence in the Amer-
ican family.  Garden  City, NY:  Anchor.

Straus,  M. A., Hamby,  S. L., Boney-McCoy,  S., &
Sugarman, D. B. (1995). The Revised  Conflict Tac-
tics  Scales  (CTS2).  Durham:  University  of New
Hampshire,  Family  Research  Laboratory.

Waldman,  I.  D.  (1996).  Aggressive  boys'  hostile
perceptual  and response  biases: The role  of  atten-
tion and impulsivity. Child Development, 67, 1015—
1033.

Weiss, B., Dodge, K. A., Bates, J. E., & Pettit, G.  S.
(1992).  Some  consequences  of  early  harsh  disci-
pline:  Child  aggression  and a  maladaptive  social
information  processing  style.  Child  Development,
63,  1321-1335.

Received  May  8,  2000
Revision  received  November  2,  2000

Accepted  January  29, 2001  •

Low Publication Prices for APA Members and Affiliates

Keeping you up-to-date. All APA Fellows, Members, Associates, and Student  Affiliates
receive—as  part  of  their  annual  dues—subscriptions  to  the American  Psychologist  and
APA  Monitor.  High  School Teacher  and  International  Affiliates  receive  subscriptions  to
the APA Monitor,  and they may subscribe to the American  Psychologist  at a  significantly
reduced rate. In addition, all Members and Student Affiliates  are eligible for savings of up
to 60% (plus a journal credit) on all other APA journals, as well as significant discounts on
subscriptions from cooperating societies and publishers (e.g., the American Association for
Counseling and Development, Academic Press, and Human Sciences Press).

Essential  resources. APA members and affiliates  receive special rates for purchases of
APA books, including the Publication Manual of the American Psychological  Association,
and on dozens of new topical books each  year.

Other  benefits  Of  membership.  Membership  in  APA  also  provides  eligibility  for
competitive insurance plans, continuing education programs, reduced APA convention fees,
and specialty  divisions.

More information. Write to American Psychological Association, Membership Services,
750 First  Street, NE, Washington, DC 20002-4242.

