Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

A longitudinal study of child siblings and theory

of mind development

Anna McAlister, Candida Peterson

∗

School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia

Abstract

This study tested a sample of 63 children twice in a longitudinal design over 14 months to examine their
theory-of-mind (ToM) understanding in relation to their number of child-aged siblings (1–12 years). Age-
appropriate batteries of ToM tests emphasising false belief were given at the start of the study, when children
had a mean age of 4–2 (range: 3–3 to 5–6), and at the end, when mean age was 5–4 (range: 4–3 to 6–9).
Irrespective of chronological age, children with 2 or more child siblings scored signiﬁcantly higher on both the
earlier and the later battery than those with no child-aged siblings. Hierarchical multiple regression analyses
revealed that, over and above chronological age and verbal intelligence, having more child siblings predicted
higher ToM scores at Times 1 and 2. Furthermore, at Time 2, the participant’s number of child-aged siblings
continued to predict higher ToM scores even after controlling for age, verbal intelligence, and Time 1 ToM
scores. Results were considered in relation to the kinds of family-based social and conversational experiences
that might foster ToM growth throughout the period from toddlerhood to the threshold of primary school.
© 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Theory of mind; Siblings; Longitudinal study; Preschoolers

When children develop a theory of mind (ToM) they become aware that human behavior is
guided by mental states of belief, knowledge, memory and imagination that may conﬂict with
overt reality. Empirically, the fundamental social understanding that is embodied in ToM is often
assessed using inferential false belief tests requiring prediction or explanation of behavior by
protagonists who have incorrect ideas that participants do not share. Wellman, Cross, and Watson
(2001) conducted a meta-analysis of 178 studies of preschoolers’ performance on these false
belief tests. They reported a striking increase from below-chance success at age 3 to pervasive
competency by age 6, indicative of “genuine conceptual change in the preschool years” (p. 655).
Wide individual differences are also apparent during the preschool period, with some children

∗

Corresponding author. Tel.: +61 7 3365 6332; fax: +61 7 3365 4466.
E-mail address: candi@psy.uq.edu.au (C. Peterson).

0885-2014/$ – see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.cogdev.2006.10.009

A. McAlister, C. Peterson / Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

259

mastering false belief many months, or even years, ahead of others. What might account for these
differences?

In a search to explain variability in typically developing children’s ages of ToM mastery, several
cross-sectional studies have examined the sibling structure of preschoolers’ households. Results
have been mixed. Initially, Perner, Ruffman, and Leekam (1994) tested 76 British preschoolers
and found a strong and linear pattern of association. Children with two or more siblings had
almost twice the only-child’s likelihood of passing false belief. Ruffman, Perner, Naito, Parkin,
and Clements (1998) subsequently added a further 370 children to Perner et al.’s original sample.
Higher false-belief scores were still linked with having more siblings, especially older ones. Yet
there seemed to be a minimum age for the family size effect to be observed. Ruffman et al. found
that 2-year olds and young 3-year olds failed to beneﬁt from siblings, even when they had several
all older than themselves.

With a Canadian sample, Jenkins and Astington (1996) conﬁrmed the link between false belief
scores and larger families while showing that it persisted even after children’s language ability
was statistically controlled. However language was relevant to the extent that young children with
slow language development gained more than those with advanced language from the presence of
siblings. Lewis, Freeman, Kryiakidou, Maridaki-Kassotaki, and Berridge (1996) studied Greek
3- and 4-year olds and, in addition to conﬁrming false belief beneﬁts of larger families found that
only-children scored particularly low, prompting the view that: “having no siblings is particularly
disadvantageous in the acquisition of false belief understanding” (p. 2937). Interestingly, when
Lewis et al. compared families that were large because of having live-in kin (e.g., cousins, aunts,
uncles, grandparents) versus those that were equally large owing to more siblings, they found
each type of social variety in the family to be equally beneﬁcial. Therefore they suggested that
siblings were of no special beneﬁt, opting instead for a “general apprenticeship” model in which
ToM is enhanced by the number of family members of all ages that a child interacts with on a
daily basis.

No signiﬁcant links between and false belief scores and numbers of siblings (older, younger
or both) were observed by Cutting and Dunn (1999) in a sample of 128 British children. The
sample was highly diverse, with a large proportion of low income and single-parent families. This
may have contributed to the null result. In fact, two other studies of economically disadvantaged
families have likewise failed to reveal any signiﬁcant links between sibling numbers and children’s
false belief understanding. In the ﬁrst of these, Cole and Mitchell tested 119 British 3- to 5-year
olds from a low income community in an initial study, and a further 71 children in a follow up. No
correlation emerged in either sample between false belief scores and sibling numbers. Cole and
Mitchell suggested a “potential contaminating inﬂuence of socio-economic status on the sibling
advantage in theory of mind” (p. 279). Similarly, Hughes and Ensor (2005) failed to observe any
association for lower-income British 2-year olds’ between sibling numbers and scores on an age-
appropriate battery of ToM tests. However, the affective quality of children’s relationships with
siblings did signiﬁcantly predict ToM even after variables like age, verbal ability and quality of
the parent–child relationship were statistically controlled. The authors suggested that 2-year olds’
advanced ToM skills might be either the product of, or the impetus for, affectionate communication
and play among siblings.

Indeed, number of siblings is generally seen not as an inﬂuence in and of itself, but rather as a
proxy for some social interaction variable, even in studies revealing a sibling-ToM link. A sibling’s
presence in the family affords the opportunity for sharing distinctively childish forms of conver-
sation and social interaction that may relate to rapid ToM growth. However these opportunities
are likely to vary not only with the emotional tone of the sibling bond (Hughes & Ensor, 2005) but

260

A. McAlister, C. Peterson / Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

also with siblings’ chronological ages (Peterson, 2000; Wright-Cassidy, Shaw-Fineberg, Brown,
& Perkins, 2005). Teenagers and young adults may not interact much with their preschooler sib-
lings. Even if they do, their social input may not differ enough from a parent’s to be inﬂuential.
Very young infants may not yet be capable of ToM-stimulating interaction, and twins may not
possess mental perspectives that are divergent enough to challenge and stimulate their co-twin’s
mind-reading (Wright-Cassidy et al., 2005).

In fact, with a sample of 265 Australian 3- to 5-year olds, Peterson (2000) found that those with
no siblings apart from a young infant, a teenager, or an adult, scored no higher than only-children
on false belief tests. But preschoolers who had at least one child-aged sibling (1–12 years) at
home scored signiﬁcantly higher than only-children, suggesting that siblings can beneﬁt ToM
development, but only when all of an age to interact together in distinctively childish ways. More
recently, McAlister and Peterson (2006), with a different sample of 124 Australian preschoolers,
and Wright-Cassidy et al. (2005), with a sample of 72 U.S. preschoolers, replicated the ﬁnding
that siblings had to be in the childhood age range (1–12 years) to be associated with advanced false
belief understanding. Wright-Cassidy et al. (2005) also found that twins with at least one child
sibling either older or younger than themselves did better than twins who had no siblings apart
from the co-twin. In other words, siblings’ ages may be as relevant as sibling numbers to advanced
ToM, prompting the conclusion that: “the sibling effect is associated not with mere exposure to
another mind but speciﬁcally to a mind or minds different from one’s own” (Wright-Cassidy et
al., 2005, p. 103).

In sum, while suggesting some promising leads, the existing evidence is still quite mixed not
only over the question of which features of the sibling constellation may be linked with advanced
ToM, but even over the more basic question of whether or not siblings do beneﬁt preschoolers’
ToM development at all. As noted above, some studies with large samples have failed to observe
sibling effects. It is conceivable that null results could have arisen in some cases owing to unknowns
such as the proportions siblings too young or old to interact (Peterson, 2000), or of twins (Wright-
Cassidy et al., 2005), or of siblings with a hostile relationship (Hughes & Ensor, 2005) in particular
studies’ samples. Equally, it is conceivable that the sibling beneﬁt for ToM may be applicable only
to children of certain ages (Ruffman et al., 1998) or social backgrounds (Cole & Mitchell, 2000).
It is clear that further investigation of the inﬂuence of numbers of child siblings on preschoolers’
ToM development is needed, hence motivating the present study.

The cross-sectional nature of most previous sibling-ToM research is a further limitation upon
understanding of the developmental age trajectory of possible sibling inﬂuences. Most studies
have examined children from a narrow age range (e.g. 3–6 to 4–6) and have used false belief
as the only index of ToM. Thus our goal was to longitudinally investigate the possible link
between ToM and the preschooler’s number of child-aged siblings using age-appropriate batteries
of ToM understanding including, but not limited to, false belief. We wanted to examine the
possibilities either (1) that siblings might exert a continuing beneﬁt upon the growth of social
understanding from age 3 to age 6 versus (2) might only be advantageous early in this period
(as indirectly suggested by Jenkins and Astington’s ﬁnding that children with immature language
gained disproportionately from the presence of a sibling) versus only later on (in line with Ruffman
et al.’s ﬁnding of a minimum age before which siblings were of no beneﬁt).

There are theoretical arguments in favour of each of these contrasting models. In support of the
possibility of longitudinal continuity of the sibling ToM advantage throughout the preschool years,
children are known to spend large amounts of time with their siblings over this period (Dunn &
Kendrick, 1982), continuously sharing activities and experiences that could foster social-cognitive
development. For example, a child who has one or more child-aged siblings will differ from an

A. McAlister, C. Peterson / Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

261

only-child throughout childhood in having more opportunities: (1) to eavesdrop upon, and intrude
into, conversations between their parents and their siblings (Dunn & Shatz, 1989), (2) to listen
to mental-state discourse, via the family language community, master the meanings of mind-
related words (Jenkins et al., 2003), (3) to observe parents reasoning with siblings (Ruffman,
Perner, & Parkin, 1999), (4) to negotiate conﬂicts (Dunn, 1996), (5) to pretend (Brown, Dunn, &
Donellan-McCall, 1996) and (6) to cooperate and compete in games of strategy (Cole & Mitchell,
2000). Each of these continuing family-based social experiences could plausibly beneﬁt the child’s
understanding of other minds steadily from age 3 to age 6.

On the other hand, discontinuity is also plausible. The period from the end of toddlerhood
to the start of primary school heralds an increase in friendships with peers outside the fam-
ily (Slomkowski & Dunn, 1996), and increased concern with peer acceptance and popularity
(Peterson & Siegal, 2002). During their longer hours spent in peers’ company, older 5- and 6-year
olds may increasingly replace sibling interaction at home with extra-familial pretend play, rule
games, negotiation, deception and teasing. If so, only-children might no longer be disadvantaged
in the richness of their encounters with other children’s points of view, and thus the sibling-ToM
link might diminish late in the preschool years. Alternatively, a longitudinal increase in the sibling-
ToM association might emerge if children must reach some minimum chronological age (Ruffman
et al., 1998) or minimum level of cognitive, linguistic or social maturity in order to be able to
beneﬁt from play and conversation with siblings. Our study will evaluate these possibilities.

1. Method

1.1. Participants

The sample consisted of 63 Australian children,1 35 boys and 28 girls, who had a mean age
of 4 years 2 months (range 3–3 to 5–6) when they were initially tested at Time 1, and a mean
age of 5 years 4 months (range 4–3 to 6–9) when the second battery of tests was administered an
average of 14 months later, at Time 2. In identifying children for retest at Time 2, we imposed a
number of selection criteria, the most important of which were: (a) that they had passed all control
questions (see below) on standard false belief tests at Time 1 (so as to ensure their language skills
were sufﬁcient to assure valid test question responses), and (b) that their total complement of
child-aged siblings (aged 1–12 years) had not altered between Times 1 and 2 (we imposed this
criterion for the sake of clarity, consistency and homogeneity in our key variable of interest over
the period of the study).

The children were recruited from preschools and child-care centres that served predominantly
middle-class neighbourhoods. All had English as a ﬁrst language and the vast majority were
Caucasian. In terms of sibling constellation, there were 10 children in the sample (16%) with
no child-aged siblings. Thirty-three children (52% of the sample) had just one child sibling, 17
(27% of the sample) had 2 siblings in the childhood age range and the remaining 3 children
(5% of the sample) had exactly 3 child siblings. As well as living in economically advantaged
communities, the parents of the children in this sample were relatively well-educated. Seventy
percent of them had continued their studies beyond high school graduation and 45% of them had
university educations.

1 A portion of the Time 1 data for 55 of these 63 children was included as part of separate cross-sectional study of a
larger sample of 124 children (McAlister and Peterson, 2006) that had a different focus, rationale and set of experimental
measures.

262

A. McAlister, C. Peterson / Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

1.2. Testing procedure

Each child was tested individually. At Time 1, all testing took place in a quiet area of the
preschool or child-care centre that the participant was attending. At Time 2, those who were still
attending preschool or child-care were again tested there. Those who had moved on to primary
school were tested after school or on a weekend either at home or at a university laboratory,
depending on their parents’ preference.

1.3. Tasks, materials and scoring

At Time 1 the children completed a battery of standard ToM tests. These tests were chosen
to include widely used tests of representational understanding of ToM that varied sufﬁciently in
difﬁculty level to be able to pick up early signs of ToM awareness while also including standard
measures like false belief. To ensure against ﬂoor effects, given that most children at Time 1 were
below the age when false belief is usually passed (Wellman et al., 2001), we followed Hughes and
Ensor’s (2005) strategy of including tests of the understanding of mental representation in pretend
play together with false belief in the Time 1 battery. We also adopted Hughes and Ensor’s one-
third weighting on pretend-real tasks since they had obtained a “modest but acceptable” (p. 656)
Cronbach’s α of .61 with such a mix. Thus our Time 1 battery had two standard false belief tests
and two pretend-real tests, all requiring understanding of “conﬂicting mental representations”
(Welch-Ross, Diecidue & Miller, 1997, p. 43), or the fact that mental representations in belief or
pretence may clash with physical reality.

At Time 2, we designed a package of standard ToM tasks that would be likely to prove
more challenging than those used at Time 1, and hence appropriate to children who were
an average of 14 months older. Consequently, at Time 2, we replaced the Time 1 pretend-
real tests with the standard appearance-reality tasks that Flavell, Flavell, and Green (1987)
had discovered were more difﬁcult than their pretend-real analogues (it is worth noting that
both pretend-real and appearance-reality tasks are frequently used in conjunction with false
belief tests in ToM research (Flavell, 1999; Welch-Ross et al., 1997), though rarely in sibling
studies).

To increase the difﬁculty of the Time 2 tasks, while retaining changed-location false belief,
we replaced the Time 1 misleading-container false belief with a more challenging false belief
measure requiring emotional inferences. According to Hughes et al. (2000), the ability to attribute
an emotion that results from a false belief can be deemed to be more difﬁcult than the attribution
of behavior in a standard false belief test, owing to the requirement for integration of two different
kinds of mental states (beliefs and emotions). Their data conﬁrmed this for typically developing
5-year olds. Thus we included Hughes et al.’s emotion-false belief test as a more difﬁcult false
belief test at Time 2, to guard against ceiling effects.

At Time 1, verbal intelligence (VIQ) was also estimated using a standardised receptive vocab-
ulary test, the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT-R: Dunn & Dunn, 1989) which was scored
as speciﬁed in the test manual to provide a standard score estimate of verbal ability, normed as
a deviation-type IQ score with a population mean of 100 and a population standard deviation
of 15. While standardized only on a U.S. population, widespread Australian use of this test has
conﬁrmed its local suitability and large-sample Australian studies (e.g., Oddy et al., 2003) have
suggested it correlates well with other standardized intelligence measures that are in wide use in
Australia.

Details of the ToM tasks comprising the Times 1 and 2 assessments were:

A. McAlister, C. Peterson / Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

263

1.3.1. Time 1 ToM tests

Baron-Cohen, Leslie, and Frith’s (1985) “Sally” changed location false belief test, presented
and scored exactly as described by the original authors apart from replacement of the second girl
doll with a boy (Peterson & Siegal, 1999). Two trials each entailed displacements of a marble that
the girl did not see. When she returned wanting her marble, the same test questions on each trial
(“Where will the girl look for her marble?”) were followed by two control questions (“Where is
the marble really?”, “Where did the girl put the marble in the beginning?”). All children passed all
four control questions. One point was given for each correct test question response to a total of 2
for the task. The other false belief test, from Gopnik and Astington (1988) involved a misleading
container. After being made privy to its unexpected contents, children were asked: (1) “[Name of
classmate] is coming next. He [she] has not seen inside this box before. When I show it to him [her]
all closed up like this, what will he [she] say is in it?” and (2) “When I ﬁrst showed you this box,
before you looked inside, what did you think was in it?” These test questions were followed by a
control question: “What is really in it?” that all children passed. Correct test question responses
earned 1 point each, so the total could range from 0 to 2. This was summed with the changed
location total to yield a total false belief score for Time 1 that could (and did) range from 0 to 4.
There were two pretend representation tests, both involving “junk” objects (a carrot and a
potato). Pretence was elicited ﬁrst with one of the objects (e.g., “Pretend this [carrot] is a phone”).
After minimal prompting (e.g., “Your phone’s ringing”), all children successfully engaged in
actions revealing their understanding and acceptance of the pretend stipulation (e.g., holding the
carrot to their ear). The tester said: “Okay, we have ﬁnished our game now. We have stopped
pretending” and gave two test questions: (1) “What is this [carrot] really?” (2) “What did we
pretend this was?”. Displaying a real version of the pretend item (e.g., a real mobile phone),
the junk item used and an irrelevant decoy (e.g., a tennis ball), the ﬁnal test questions were: (3)
“Which one did we pretend was a [phone]?” and (4) “Which one is really a [phone]?” The potato
was used as soap in an identical procedure. Thus for each task, using different syntax, there were
two questions about real identities and two about pretend identities of the objects. Since children
could have answered any individual question correctly by chance, and since a child who got only
some items right (for example, by naming the real identity of the pretend object throughout) could
be seen to understand less about pretending than another who got all questions wrong by mixing
up “pretend” and “real” labels, we imposed the conservative scoring criterion of requiring correct
answers to all four questions to pass each test with a score of 1 point, to a maximum total of 2 for
the two pretend tests combined.

1.3.2. Time 1 ToM composite score

In order to obtain as sensitive a ToM measure as possible, we assessed the possibility of
combining children’s scores on the false belief total (0–4) and the pretend total (0–2) into a
reliable composite. For the present sample, Cronbach’s alpha for the sum of these two scores was
α = .59. This was deemed to indicate modest, but adequate, internal consistency in order to use
the combined total score (0–6) as our main index of Time 1 ToM understanding.

1.3.3. Time 2 ToM tests

The same 2-trial changed location false belief test from Time 1 was used at Time 2 with new
objects, dolls and hiding places. As before, all children passed all control questions. Correct
test question responses earned 1 point and were summed so that the task total ranged from 0
to 2. The more advanced false belief test, requiring the inference of emotions based on false
beliefs was adapted from Hughes et al. (2000), who themselves had adapted a test from Harris,

264

A. McAlister, C. Peterson / Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

Johnson, Hutton, Andrews, and Cooke (1989). In our version, a puppet who liked animal cookies
was hidden while a clearly labelled box of these was emptied and ﬁlled with rocks. The puppet
returned, wanting a snack, and children were asked two test questions, one requiring a prediction
of the puppet’s emotion before, and the other after, he opened the closed cookie box. Most children
named an emotion (e.g., “sad”). If not, or if their response that was ambiguous (e.g., “confused”),
a picture scale with happy, neutral and sad cartoon faces was presented to allow for pointing
responses. Children earned 1 point for stating that the puppet would be happy with the gift of the
cookies before he opened the box and 1 point for a negative emotion (“sad”, “angry”) after he
looked. Totals for the task ranged from 0 to 2 and were summed with the changed location total
to yield a Time 2 false belief total score that could (and did) range from 0 to 4.

For the two appearance-reality (AR) tests we used a procedure based closely on Flavell, Green,
and Flavell (1986). One test involved a fruit-shaped candle and the other a ballpoint pen that looked
like a carrot, banana or ﬂower. The tester demonstrated the object’s real identity (e.g., lit the candle)
and asked two test questions (counterbalanced): “What is this really and truly?” and “When you
look at this with your eyes right now, what does it look like, [pause] does it look like a [candle]
or like [an apple]?” Accurate understanding of the appearance-reality distinction requires that a
child genuinely distinguish the two concepts. Thus one who gets only a single test question right
(e.g., by saying “apple” to both questions) can be deemed to have less understanding than who
distinguishes the two constructs but transposes their labels (e.g., says its really an apple but it
looks like a candle). Consequently, to pass each task (scored as 1 point), our conservative scoring
required correct answers both test questions. Thus, by answering all four questions correctly,
children could earn a maximum total of two points for appearance-reality as a whole.

1.3.4. Total ToM score for Time 2

The changed-location false belief, emotion-false-belief, and appearance-reality tasks displayed
their predicted ordering of difﬁculty for this sample. The AR test proved easiest, with 62% of
children scoring perfectly. The standard false belief test produced 43% perfect scores while, in
line with Hughes et al. (2000), only 24% of the children in this sample scored perfectly on the
emotion-false-belief task. In order to obtain as sensitive a measure of Time 2 ToM as possible, we
assessed the possibility of summing totals on changed-location false belief (0–2), emotion-false-
belief (0–2) and appearance-reality (0–2) tasks. Cronbach’s alpha for this total was α = .61. This
was deemed to indicate adequate internal consistency for use of the composite total as our main
index of Time 2 ToM understanding. Total scores ranged from 1 to 6 in this sample.

2. Results

At Time 1, the children earned a mean ToM total of 3.63 (S.D. = 1.90). No children scored
zero for ToM at Time 2, and only four children (6%) did so at Time 1, revealing a low rate of
ﬂoor effects. Conversely, only 15 children (24%) scored at ceiling at Time 1 by making no errors
at all on any task. Only 13 (21%) were at ceiling at Time 2. Given that the Time 2 measures
were deliberately chosen as to be normatively more difﬁcult than those for Time 1 (and hence
appropriately challenging to children who were 14 months older), we did not necessarily expect
overall gains from Times 1 to 2. In fact, the sample’s total ToM mean at Time 2 was 3.97
(S.D. = 1.60), a difference from Time 1 that was not statistically signiﬁcant, t (62) = 1.25, p > .20.
Increased difﬁculty of the Time 2 battery, especially the advanced emotion-false-belief tests
(Hughes et al., 2000), may have compensated for any overall improvement in ToM understanding
over the 14 months. However this was not problematic for our main research goals. Quite the

A. McAlister, C. Peterson / Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

265

contrary, the fact that the age-appropriate sets of ToM tests avoided both ﬂoor and ceiling effects
at both times meant there was substantial room for Times 1–2 gains, and enough individual
variability at each time point to enable sensitive testing of our main hypotheses.

2.1. ToM at Time 1

There was a signiﬁcant correlation between the children’s Time 1 ToM total scores and the
number of child-aged siblings in their families, r (61) = .39, p < .01. To more closely examine
the basis for this effect, a one-way ANOVA was conducted to compare the 10 children who
had no child siblings (M = 2.60) with the 33 who had exactly 1 child-aged sibling (M = 3.36)
and the 20 who had either 2 or 3 child-aged siblings (M = 4.60). A statistically signiﬁcant dif-
ference in Time 1 ToM scores emerged, F(2,60) = 4.99, p < .01. A post hoc Newman–Keuls test
showed that the only-children scored signiﬁcantly below those with two or three child-aged sib-
lings, whereas the group with a single child-aged sibling did not differ signiﬁcantly either from
the only-children or from those with two siblings or more. The results for only-children are
line with previous suggestions (Lewis et al., 1996; Perner et al., 1994; Peterson, 2000) that the
absence of any child siblings at all in the household is particularly disadvantageous for ToM
performance.

Since the ages of the sample at Time 1 ranged rather broadly, we were able to cross-sectionally
test whether the sibling beneﬁt was age-speciﬁc within this early period in development when
the children were predominantly aged 3 (30%) or 4 (57%). Subdividing children’s ages at the
median of 4 years 2 months, a 2 (age group)× 3 (sibling group: 0, 1 or 2+) ANOVA revealed
no signiﬁcant main effect for age, F < 1, and no signiﬁcant interaction, F < 1. Only the sibling
effect was signiﬁcant, F(2,57) = 4.80, p = .01, echoing results of the one-way ANOVA in showing
higher ToM scores for those children with two siblings or more.

To examine the extent to which child siblings contributed to individual variability in children’s
levels of ToM understanding independently of age and verbal intelligence (VIQ), a hierarchical
multiple regression analysis was conducted. With total ToM scores at Time 1 as the dependent
variable, the predictors age and VIQ were entered ﬁrst, as control variables, at Step 1. The regres-
sion equation differed signiﬁcantly from zero at the end of this step, Mult. R = .47, R2 = .22, Adj.
R2 = .20, F(2,60) = 8.50, p < .01. Next, with the entry of participants’ numbers of child-aged sib-
lings at Step 2, a signiﬁcant increment in the prediction arose, R2 (change) = .09; F (change) = 7.80,
p < .01. The full model also remained statistically signiﬁcant at the end of this ﬁnal step, Mult.
R = .56, R2 = .31, Adj. R2 = .28, F(3,59) = 8.91, p < .001. Table 1 shows the unstandardized regres-
sion coefﬁcients (B), their standard errors (S.E.(B)), the standardized regression coefﬁcients (beta)
and the signiﬁcance levels for all variables in the full model at the end of Step 2.

These regression results indicate that numbers of child-aged siblings made a signiﬁcant inde-
pendent contribution to the prediction of Time 1 ToM over and above age and VIQ, and that

Table 1
Final step of regression model predicting Time 1 ToM

Variable

Child age
Verbal IQ
Number of child siblings

** p < .01, two-tailed.

B

.27
.04
.77

S.E.(B)

.37
.01
.28

β

.08
.40
.31

t

.74
3.62**
2.79**

266

A. McAlister, C. Peterson / Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

number of child-aged siblings and verbal ability each accounted for signiﬁcant variability in Time
1 ToM scores in the ﬁnal model.

2.2. Time 2 ToM

As at Time 1, the children’s total ToM scores at Time 2 were correlated with their total child-
aged siblings, r (61) = .38, p < .01. To locate the basis for this effect, a one-way ANOVA was
conducted to compare the total Time 2 ToM scores of the 10 children who had no child siblings
(M = 2.90) with the 33 who had exactly 1 child sibling (M = 3.82) and the 20 who had either 2 or
3 child siblings (M = 4.75). A statistically signiﬁcant difference emerged, F(2,60) = 5.48, p < .01.
A post hoc Newman–Keuls test showed that the only-children scored signiﬁcantly below those
with 2 or 3 child-aged siblings, whereas the group with a single child-aged sibling did not differ
signiﬁcantly from either of the other groups.

To see whether the child’s age at the time of completing the second ToM assessment interacted
with his or her total number of child-aged siblings in the prediction of Time 2 ToM performance,
we computed a 2 (age group)× 3 (sibling group: 0, 1 or 2+) ANOVA on Time 2 ToM scores. The
younger age group for this analysis ranged from 4.25 to 5.25 years (n = 31) and the older, from
5.33 to 6.75 years (n = 32). No signiﬁcant effects emerged for age group, F(1,57) = 1.75, p > .15,
or the interaction, F < 1. Only the sibling main effect was signiﬁcant, F(2,57) = 4.29, p < .05,
echoing results of the one-way ANOVA in showing higher ToM scores for those children with
2 or more child siblings than those with none, and also showing that this sibling inﬂuence was
equally apparent in both younger and older subgroups at Time 2, just as it had been at Time 1.

To more closely examine the effects of having child siblings on individual variability in chil-
dren’s levels of ToM understanding at Time 2, a hierarchical multiple regression analysis was
conducted. With total ToM scores at Time 2 as the dependent variable, the predictors age (at Time
2) and VIQ were entered as control variables at Step 1. The regression equation did not differ
from zero at the end of this step, Mult. R = .26, R2 = .07, Adj. R2 = .03, F(2,60) = 2.08, p > .10.
With only age and VIQ in the equation, age was separately signiﬁcant as a predictor (β = .25,
t = 2.01, p < .05), but verbal intelligence was not, t < 1. Though unpredicted, it is conceivable that
the inclusion of emotion understanding as a component of the Time 2 false belief assessment may
have contributed to its weaker link with language (Astington, 2001).

At Step 2, with the entry of the Time 1 ToM score as a predictor, no statistically signiﬁcant
increment arose, R2 (change) = .05; F (change) = 3.51, p > .05, nor was the full model signiﬁ-
cant at a conventional level at the end of this second step, Mult. R = .34, R2 = .12, Adj. R2 = .07,
F(3,59) = 2.62, p = .06. However, at Step 3, with the entry of number of child siblings, a signiﬁcant
increment in the prediction of Time 2 ToM arose, R2 (change) = .07; F (change) = 4.59, p < .05.
The full regression equation was likewise signiﬁcant at the end of this ﬁnal step, Mult. R = .43,
R2 = .18, Adj. R2 = .13, F(4,58) = 3.23, p < .05. Table 2 shows the unstandardized regression coefﬁ-
cients (B), their standard errors (S.E.(B)), the standardized coefﬁcients (beta) and the signiﬁcance
levels for all variables in the full model at the end of Step 3.

In other words at Time 2, when most participants were aged 5 and 6, the number of child-
aged siblings made a signiﬁcant independent contribution to the prediction of variability in ToM
performance over and above the inﬂuences of Time 2 age, verbal IQ and Time 1 ToM scores. In
the ﬁnal model at Step 3, only number of child siblings emerged as a statistically signiﬁcantly
predictor of variability in Time 2 ToM.

In line with the regression for Time 1, and with the ANOVA results at both time points, these
results suggest, that throughout the typical ToM acquisition period from the early 3 s through age 6

A. McAlister, C. Peterson / Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

267

Table 2
Final step of regression model predicting Time 2 ToM

Variable

Time 2 age
Verbal IQ
Time 1 ToM total score
Number of child siblings

* p < .05, two-tailed.

B

.38
.01
.14
.59

S.E.(B)

.34
.01
.12
.28

β

.14
−.09
.16
.28

t

1.14
.69
1.14
2.14*

years, having a larger number of child-aged siblings continuously enhanced the ToM performance
of the children in this particular sample. Furthermore, the advantage conferred by having more
child-aged siblings at home, as well as remaining relatively constant across fairly broad cross-
sectional and longitudinal age spans, and across the two different age-appropriate ToM composites
we used, was relatively independent of verbal intelligence, especially at the older testing point.

3. Discussion

The present longitudinal ﬁndings were consistent with those of several previous cross-sectional
studies in revealing signiﬁcant associations between children’s advanced performance on standard
ToM tests and their access at home to larger numbers of child-aged siblings with whom to play and
converse. In addition, these ﬁndings extended upon previous research by suggesting that access to
child siblings continues to be of beneﬁt for children’s ToM performance throughout the preschool
period, from age 3 to age 6. Of course, the nature of our sample must be considered in interpreting
these ﬁndings in the context of previous research. The parents of our sample were mostly middle-
class and well-educated. The fact of their longitudinal involvement testiﬁed to their residential
stability and high motivation for research. Thus our results fail to address the possibility (Cole
& Mitchell, 2000) that children in families with high mobility, low incomes and poor education
may not gain ToM beneﬁts from siblings. This possibility could account for several large-scale
failures to replicate the sibling-ToM link (e.g., Cutting & Dunn, 1999; Hughes & Ensor, 2005).
Furthermore, the ToM tasks we used, though including related concepts like pretence-reality and
perception-reality contrasts, had a strong emphasis on false belief. It is conceivable that false
belief may be one ToM concept that beneﬁts particularly strongly from child–sibling interaction,
and only-children may be selectively deprived of exposure to false beliefs. Their conversational
partners (parents) are generally well-informed and truthful communicators, whereas young sib-
lings’ conversations may expose preschoolers to many instances of false beliefs via ignorance,
misinformation, fantasies, disputes, innocent mistakes, and deception. As Wright-Cassidy et al.
(2005) suggested, parents with young siblings of mixed ages may also discuss false beliefs more
in order “to explain one child’s viewpoint to the other” (p. 104). But only-children may not miss
out as much in exposure to other ToM concepts, like desire or intention, even when interacting
exclusively with adults at home.

If access to interaction with child-aged siblings at home does have special value for advancing
the understanding of false belief, as opposed to other aspects of social understanding, it would
be useful in future research to further broaden the assessment of children’s ToM beyond the
disproportionate emphasis on false belief that has prevailed in both the present, and previous,
sibling-ToM studies. In the context of recommending such a broadening of empirical approach,
Astington (2001) noted, “In looking beyond false belief understanding to differences in desire and

268

A. McAlister, C. Peterson / Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

intention understanding one may ﬁnd that . . . there may be consequences for social sensitivity
that are independent of language” (p. 687).

The contemporaneous and longitudinal links that we observed between child–sibling numbers
and higher scores on standard ToM tests are consistent with a direction of inﬂuence from child
siblings to advanced mental-state understanding, rather than vice versa. Indeed, it is hard to
imagine how the reverse sequence (in which children’s own ToM scores could cause them to
have more or fewer siblings) could operate, short of parents altering their childbearing decisions
in response to the levels of social understanding displayed by their older offspring. Given the
closely spaced ages of the child siblings in our sample, this seems unlikely. Nevertheless, a
simple path from child siblings to enhanced ToM understanding is not the only possibility. Some
third variable could conceivably explain these longitudinal and cross-sectional links. For example,
parental attitudes and parenting behaviors could possibly be underlying factors, along with parental
conversational styles (Wright-Cassidy et al., 2005). It is known that families differ from one
another in the extent to which parents are “mind-minded” (Meins & Fernyhough, 1999). Perhaps
highly mind-minded parents, who ascribe beliefs and other cognitive states to their offspring from
an early age, may interact with their children in ways that foster rapid ToM growth. At the same
time, mind-minded parents might plan large, closely spaced families so as to give each of their
offspring the beneﬁt of social interaction with like-minded siblings. Many other possibilities are
also conceivable, including mediating links between child siblings and ToM via factors such as
executive functioning (Cole & Mitchell, 2000; Hughes & Ensor, 2005; McAlister & Peterson,
2006), language (Jenkins & Astington, 1996) or pretend play (Harris, 2005).

Though causality cannot be decided by data like these, the present study’s support for a link
between ToM and numbers of child siblings does assist theoretical understanding by suggesting a
role for nurturant social experiences, rather than purely innate neurobiological maturation, in ToM
development. From a strict nativist perspective, it is hard to see how family access to siblings could
inﬂuence the pace of maturation of a preordained mental-state module. Of course, many nativist
theories accord a role to the social environment in triggering the onset of modular maturation
(e.g., Scholl & Leslie, 2001), so the link between siblings and ToM is not entirely incompatible
with nativist positions.

From a “nurture” perspective, in which culture and accumulating experiences drive the pace
of ToM acquisition, it is intriguing to speculate on what kinds of speciﬁc experiences arising in
households with child-aged siblings, but not so often in only-children’s families, could conceivably
contribute to the rapid growth of false belief and other ToM concepts. In this context, it seems
clear that sibling numbers are not direct causal factors, in and of themselves. Instead, like a child’s
chronological age, the sibling complement merely testiﬁes to the operation for some underlying,
not yet fully speciﬁed, direct cause. To view the analogy more clearly, in terms of age, a child in
a coma who simply gained years of age without having conscious social experiences would not
be expected to have mastered ToM if he or she suddenly awoke from the coma at age 5 and could
somehow be tested for it. Similarly, in the unlikely case of a child having siblings at home with
whom he or she never interacted, no sibling advantage for ToM would be expected. Thus number
of child-aged siblings can, like chronological age, be deemed a visible marker for some as-yet-
not-fully visible causal inﬂuences. Though possibilities must remain speculative, it is interesting
to consider what these more directly formative experiences might be.

In line with the longitudinal pattern we observed, previous research has identiﬁed a number
of potentially valuable sibling-based family social experiences that are likely to be more frequent
in households with larger numbers of young siblings throughout the whole of childhood (Dunn,
1996). As noted earlier, children with siblings have rich opportunities not only to converse with

A. McAlister, C. Peterson / Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

269

their siblings directly, using cognitive verbs and syntax, but also to eavesdrop upon conversations,
negotiations, reminiscences, pretence, or disciplinary encounters between siblings and parents.
Overhearing conversations could plausibly enable greater reﬂection than active participation, as
for an only-child. Throughout childhood, sibling rivalries and conﬂicts are also frequent in large
families, especially when siblings are closely spaced in age. Disputes between siblings provide
many opportunities for exposure to others’ discrepant mental perspectives (Herrera & Dunn,
1997). Conﬂict may give rise to negative emotions that call forth instructive mentalistic expla-
nations (Lagatutta & Wellman, 2002) and sibling conﬂicts, together with team and competitive
games, might also foster executive functioning skills like planning or inhibition of impulsive-
ness (Cole & Mitchell, 2000). In sharing in pretend play with siblings, or while talking about it
(Brown et al., 1996), children are likely to gain exposure to imaginary ideas, skills for negotiating
the sharing of fantasies, and rich role-taking experience (Harris, 2005). All of these could con-
ceivably assist ToM development in a manner not so readily available to an only-child. Further
research, longitudinal as well as cross-sectional, would be valuable in order to further explore
these promising possibilities.

References

Astington, J. W. (2001). The future of theory of mind research. Child Development, 72, 685–687.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does the autistic child have a “theory of mind”? Cognition, 21, 37–46.
Cole, K., & Mitchell, P. (2000). Siblings in the development of executive control and a theory of mind. British Journal of

Developmental Psychology, 18, 279–295.

Cutting, A. L., & Dunn, J. (1999). Theory of mind, emotion understanding, language, and family background: Individual

differences and interrelations. Child Development, 70, 853–865.

Dunn, J. (1996). The Emanuel Miller Memorial Lecture: 1995. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 37, 507–518.
Dunn, J., & Kendrick, C. (1982). The speech of two- and three-year-olds to infant siblings: “Baby talk” and the context

of communication. Journal of Child Language, 9, 579–595.

Dunn, J., & Shatz, M. (1989). Becoming a conversationalist despite (or because of) having an older sibling. Child

Development, 60, 399–410.

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1989). Peabody picture vocabulary test—revised. Minnesota: American Guidance Service.
Flavell, J. H. (1999). Cognitive development: Children’s knowledge about the mind. Annual Review of Psychology, 50,

21–45.

Flavell, J. H., Flavell, E. R., & Green, F. L. (1987). The effects of question clariﬁcation and memory aids on young

children’s performance on appearance-reality tasks. Cognitive Development, 2, 127–144.

Flavell, J. H., Green, F. L., & Flavell, E. R. (1986). Development of knowledge about the appearance-reality distinction.

Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 51, 1–68.

Gopnik, A., & Astington, J. W. (1988). Children’s understanding of representational change and its relation to the under-

standing of false belief and the appearanceeality distinction. Child Development, 59, 3–26.

Harris, P. L. (2005). Conversation, pretense and theory of mind. In J. W. Astington, & J. Baird (Eds.), Why language

matters for theory of mind (pp. 70–83). New York: Oxford University Press.

Harris, P. L., Johnson, C. N., Hutton, D., Andrews, G., & Cooke, A. (1989). Young children’s theory of mind and emotion.

Cognition & Emotion, 3, 379–400 [Special Issue: Development of emotion-cognition relations].

Hughes, C., Adlam, A., Happ´e, F., Jackson, J., Taylor, A., & Caspi, A. (2000). Good test-retest reliability for standard and
advanced false-belief tasks across a wide range of abilities. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 41, 483–490.
Hughes, C., & Ensor, R. (2005). Executive function and theory of mind in 2 year olds: a family affair? Developmental

Neuropsychology, 28, 645–668.

Jenkins, J. M., & Astington, J. W. (1996). Cognitive factors and family structure associated with theory of mind develop-

ment in young children. Developmental Psychology, 32, 70–78.

Lagatutta, K., & Wellman, H. M. (2002). Differences in early parent-child conversations about negative versus positive

emotions. Developmental Psychology, 38, 564–580.

Lewis, C., Freeman, N. H., Kyriakidou, C., Maridaki Kassotaki, K., et al. (1996). Social inﬂuences on false belief access:

Speciﬁc sibling inﬂuences or general apprenticeship? Child Development, 67, 2930–2947.

270

A. McAlister, C. Peterson / Cognitive Development 22 (2007) 258–270

McAlister, A. R., & Peterson, C. C. (2006). Mental playmates: Siblings, executive functioning, and theory of mind. British

Journal of Developmental Psychology, 24, 733–751.

Meins, E., & Fernyhough, C. (1999). Linguistic acquisitional style and mentalizing development. Cognitive Development,

14, 363–380.

Oddy, W., Kendall, G., Blair, E., de Klerk, N., Stanley, F., Landau, L., et al. (2003). Breast feeding and cognitive devel-

opment in childhood. Paediatric & Perinatal Epidemiology, 17, 81–90.

Perner, J., Ruffman, T., & Leekam, S. R. (1994). Theory of mind is contagious: You catch it from your sibs. Child

Development, 65, 1228–1238.

Peterson, C. C. (2000). Inﬂuence of siblings’ perspectives on theory of mind. Cognitive Development, 15, 435–455.
Peterson, C. C., & Siegal, M. (1999). Representing inner worlds: Theory of mind in autistic, deaf, and normal hearing

children. Psychological Science, 10, 126–129.

Peterson, C. C., & Siegal, M. (2002). Mindreading and moral awareness in popular and rejected preschoolers. British

Journal of Developmental Psychology, 2, 205–224.

Ruffman, T., Perner, J., Naito, M., Parkin, L., & Clements, W. A. (1998). Older (but not younger) siblings facilitate false

belief understanding. Developmental Psychology, 34, 161–174.

Slomkowski, C., & Dunn, J. (1996). Young children’s understanding of other people’s beliefs and feelings and their

connected communication with friends. Developmental Psychology, 32, 442–447.

Welch-Ross, M. K., Diecidue, K., & Miller, S. A. (1997). Young children’s understanding of conﬂicting mental represen-

tation predicts suggestibility. Developmental Psychology, 33, 43–53.

Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind development: The truth about false

belief. Child Development, 72, 655–684.

