Articles

Security of Attachment as a Predictor of
Symbolic and Mentalising Abilities: A
Longitudinal Study
Elizabeth Meins, Charles Fernyhough, James Russell, University of
Cambridge and David Clark-Carter, Staffordshire University

Abstract

The  development  of  symbolic  and  mentalising  abilities  was  examined  in  33  children
whose security of attachment had been assessed in infancy. It was found that securely
attached  children:  (i) were  better  able  to  incorporate  an  experimenter’s  play  sugges-
tions into their sequences of symbolic play at 31 months; and (ii) performed better on a
version of Wimmer and Perner’s (1983) unexpected transfer task at age 4. There was
also evidence of superior mentalising abilities among the secure group at age 5, despite
no  group  differences  being  found  in  general  cognitive  ability.  We  suggest  that  these
security-related  differences  might  be  related  to  mothers’  propensity  to  treat  their
securely  attached  children  as  individuals  with  minds.  In  support  of  this  hypothesis,
mothers in the secure group adopted more sensitive tutoring strategies, and were more
likely to describe their children in terms of their mental characteristics. Possible devel-
opmental pathways linking security of attachment in infancy with subsequent develop-
ment were investigated using path analyses.

Key words: Attachment; symbolic play; maternal sensitivity; mentalising abilities

Since the publication of Wimmer and Perner’s (1983) classic ﬁndings, there has been
general agreement that, by the end of the preschool years, children understand that
people’s  behaviour  is  governed  by  their  beliefs  about  the  world.  Thus,  when 
presented  with  Wimmer  and  Perner’s  ‘unexpected  transfer’  task,  4-year-olds  typi-
cally realise that a naïve protagonist will search for an object in the place where it
was  originally  hidden,  rather  than  in  its  current  location.  Similar  developments 
have  been  described  in  children’s  understanding  of  ‘informational  access’,  or  the

Elizabeth  Meins,  Charles  Fernyhough  and  James  Russell,  Department  of  Experimental  Psychology,
University of Cambridge (ﬁrst two authors now at Department of Psychology, University of Durham).
David Clark-Carter, School of Social Sciences, Staffordshire University.

The  research  reported  in  this  paper  was  supported  by  an  ESRC  research  studentship  to  the  ﬁrst
author, and by an MRC research studentship to the second author. We are very grateful to the children
and  mothers  who  took  part  in  this  study,  and  would  also  like  to  thank  Paul  Harris,  Dorothy  Bishop,
Eamonn Ferguson and four anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on an earlier version of this
paper.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to: Dr. Elizabeth Meins, Department of

Psychology, University of Durham, Science Laboratories, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998. Published by Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and 350 Main Street,
Malden, MA 02148, USA.

2 Elizabeth Meins et al.

awareness of how people’s beliefs are determined by the information which is avail-
able to them (Perner, 1991). In attempting to explain these ﬁndings, some theorists
have  posited  innately  speciﬁed  ‘metarepresentational’  capacities  which  ultimately
allow  the  representation  of  others’  representations  of  reality  (e.g.  Leslie,  1991).
Alternatively, children’s developing understanding of other minds has been seen as a
process  of  gradual  revision  of  the  child’s  ‘theories’  about  how  mind  determines
behaviour.  Thirdly,  supporters  of  the  various  species  of  simulation  theory  (e.g.
Harris, 1991) argue that mentalising abilities are largely dependent upon children’s
past  experiences  of  other  minds,  such  that  children  who  have  encountered  a  wide
enough range of situational possibilities are able to use these experiences as a basis
for predicting behaviour. A fourth view, mainly inﬂuenced by the work of Vygotsky
(e.g. 1978), holds that individuals’ engagement with other minds is the result of the
internalisation of the perspectives of others in interpersonal contexts, and the foun-
dation of ‘dialogic’ modes of thinking (Fernyhough, 1996).

Recently, the focus of research in this area has shifted away from pinpointing the
precise  age  at  which  children  can  pass  false  belief  tasks  toward  the  question  of
whether individual differences in children’s social experience impact upon the child’s
nascent  mentalising  abilities.  For  example,  Dunn  and  colleagues  (Dunn,  Brown,
Slomkowski,  Tesla  &  Youngblade,  1991;  Youngblade  &  Dunn,  1995)  found  that
children who grew up in families where feelings were commonly discussed went on to
perform  better  on  mentalising  tasks.  The  size  of  the  child’s  available  ‘social
resources’ also appears to be important in this respect. Perner, Ruffman and Leekam
(1994) reported that children with many siblings were relatively more successful on
mentalising  tasks  than  their  peers  from  smaller  families,  an  effect  which  Ruffman,
Perner, Naito, Parkin and Clements (1996) showed to be speciﬁc to older siblings. A
study  of  Greek  and  Cypriot  children  (Lewis,  Freeman,  Kyriakidou,  Maridaki-
Kassotaki  &  Berridge,  1996)  found  that  daily  interaction  with  a  large  number  of
adult family members and with older children was related to superior performance
on a battery of false belief tasks. One might expect the observed relations between
familial  interactions  and  mentalising  abilities  to  stem  in  part  from  these  children’s
greater experience of interpersonal conﬂict, which is likely to be resolved with refer-
ence to the mental states of the participants. For example, Dunn et al. (1991) found
that children whose mothers frequently attempted to control the behaviour of older
siblings were better able to explain a puppet’s behaviour in terms of its false belief.
To date, however, no studies have considered how the development of mentalising
abilities might be inﬂuenced by individual differences in the quality of interpersonal
relationships  in  infancy.  One  of  the  most  important  aspects  of  such  early  relation-
ships is the nature of the relationship between the child and the primary caregiver,
speciﬁcally,  the  security of  this  attachment  (Ainsworth,  Blehar,  Waters  &  Wall,
1978).

Why  might  security  of  attachment  be  related  to  the  development  of  mentalising
abilities?  First,  security-based  differences  have  already  been  found  in  the  realm  of
symbolic play, which, in its requirement of an understanding of non-veridical mental
orientations to reality, is generally agreed to be a precursor of mentalising abilities
(e.g.  Harris,  1992;  Hobson,  1993;  Leslie,  1987).  During  infancy,  children  rated  as
securely  attached  to  their  mothers  have  been  reported  to  engage  in  more  frequent
and sophisticated bouts of solo pretence than their insecurely attached peers (Belsky,
Garduque & Hrncir, 1984; Bretherton, Bates, Benigni, Camaioni & Volterra, 1979;
Matas, Arend & Sroufe, 1978). Belsky et al. (1984) found that securely attached 12-

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

Attachment and Mentalising Abilities 3

to 18-month-olds beneﬁted comparatively little from an experimenter’s instructions
within  a  play  context,  since  they  were  already  performing  close  to  their  maximum
level in the pre-instruction condition. By the third year of life, this early superiority
in solo play develops into differences in the ability to interact with others in collabo-
rative bouts of pretence. For example, Slade (1987) found that maternal involvement
in toddlers’ play served a facilitating function for securely attached children, but not
for  their  insecurely  attached  peers.  If  securely  attached  children  are  better  able  to
recognise and act upon the perspectives of others in a play scenario, it may be that
these  children  will  be  better  able  to  represent  such  perspectival  differences  at  the
level of belief. This suggestion is supported by Lillard (1993), who argued that sym-
bolic play may offer a zone of proximal development (Vygotsky, 1978) for the abilities
which underpin an understanding of other minds.

Security-based  differences  have  also  been  observed  in  at  least  two  further  areas
which  may  be  relevant  to  the  development  of  mentalising  abilities:  (a) in  infancy,
mothers  of  securely  attached  children  are  more  sensitive  to  their  children’s  needs
(Ainsworth,  Bell  &  Stayton,  1971)  and  consistent  in  their  patterns  of  mothering
(Isabella,  1993);  and  (b) mothers  of  securely  attached  children  are  more  likely  to
invoke  mental  states  in  describing  the  behaviour  of  others  (Fonagy,  Steele,  Steele,
Higgitt & Target, 1994). Although Fonagy et al.’s (1994) ﬁndings were derived from
mothers’  responses  to  the  Adult  Attachment  Interview  (George,  Kaplan  &  Main,
1985), it may be reasonable to assume that such differences in the use of mental state
terms will carry over to mothers’ interactions with their infants.

We suggest that all of these differences exist because mothers of securely attached
children are more likely to treat their children as mental agents, or individuals with
minds, from an early age. A similar point is made by Ainsworth et al. (1971), who
suggest that the mother of a securely attached child is ‘capable of perceiving things
from [the child’s] point of view’ and respects the child ‘as a separate person; she also
respects his activity-in-progress and thus avoids interrupting him’ (p. 43). Through
her greater ability to ‘tune in’ to her child’s current mental activity, the mother of the
securely  attached  child  is  able  to  present  alternative  perspectives  on  reality  (for
example, by offering suggestions for a new act of pretence, or by talking about the
mental states of family members) in such a way that they can be readily assimilated
(Fernyhough, 1996). This in turn gives reason to suspect that securely attached chil-
dren,  through  their  increased  opportunities  for  active  engagement  with  their  own
and  others’  mental  states,  will  develop  a  superior  understanding  of  other  people’s
mental orientations to the world, and the beliefs and desires which direct and moti-
vate behaviour.

There  is,  to  date,  little  empirical  evidence  for  a  link  between  security  of  attach-
ment and children’s understanding of other minds. Main (1991) reported some pre-
liminary  ﬁndings  on  the  relationship  between  early  security  of  attachment  and
children’s  subsequent  metacognitive  abilities.  She  found  that  6-year-olds  who  had
been securely attached in infancy were more likely to acknowledge that other people
could not read their thoughts, and realised that a particular situation could give rise
to different emotional responses in different people. Fonagy, Redfern and Charman
(1997) reported a similar relationship between 3- to 6-year-olds’ performance on the
Separation Anxiety Test (Klagsbrun & Bowlby, 1976), and a task which required an
understanding of the relation between belief and emotion. However, Fonagy et al.’s
study  only  investigated  the  concurrent relationship  between  security  of  attachment
and  mentalising  abilities,  addressing  neither  the  question  of  whether  children’s 

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

4 Elizabeth Meins et al.

security  of  attachment  in  infancy is  related  to  their  mentalising  abilities  in  early
childhood, nor which features of this relationship might be important. One aim of
the studies reported here is to establish whether one such feature is a mother’s pro-
clivity to treat her child as a mental agent.

The  studies  reported  below  attempted  to  trace  the  longitudinal  development  of
symbolic  and  mentalising  abilities  with  respect  to  infantile  security  of  attachment.
The  mothers  and  children  who  took  part  in  these  studies  were  recruited  into  a
research project in infancy, at which time their security of attachment was assessed
using  the  strange  situation  procedure  (Ainsworth  &  Wittig,  1969).  Four  follow-up
studies were performed: (a) an assessment of pretend play at 31 months (Study One);
(b) an  investigation  at  age  3  into  mothers’  tutoring  sensitivity  and  tendency  to
describe  their  children  in  mentalistic  terms  (Study  Two);  (c) an  assessment  of  chil-
dren’s performance on the unexpected transfer task at age 4 (Study Three); and (d)
administration at age 5 of a task requiring an understanding of informational access,
and one relating belief and emotion (Study Four). Study Two’s assessments of moth-
ers’ tutoring sensitivity and tendency to describe their children’s mental characteris-
tics  were  taken  as  measures  of  maternal  proclivity  to  treat  the  child  as  a  mental
agent. In order to control for the possible confounding effects of socio-economic sta-
tus and general cognitive ability, measures of these variables were also taken.

Our main hypothesis was that mothers of securely attached children would show a
greater  tendency  to  treat  their  children  as  individuals  with  minds,  which  would  in
turn inﬂuence children’s ability to engage with other people on a mental level. The
following speciﬁc hypotheses were tested: (a) children classiﬁed as securely attached
in infancy would show a greater ability to incorporate the verbal suggestions of an
experimenter into their sequences of pretence (Study One); (b) secure group mothers’
greater proclivity to treat their children as mental agents would be reﬂected in their
sensitivity to their children’s current level of functioning (as measured in a tutoring
context), and their proclivity to describe their children in terms of their mental char-
acteristics (Study Two); and (c) children receiving a secure attachment classiﬁcation
in infancy would perform better than their insecurely attached peers on tasks requir-
ing an understanding of other minds (Studies Three and Four). It was predicted that
support for the main hypothesis would be demonstrated by meaningful correlations
between these variables.

Study One1

The purpose of the ﬁrst study was to examine whether children classiﬁed as securely
attached  in  infancy  would  be  better  able  to  incorporate  the  verbal  suggestions  of
another person into their pretend play. This hypothesis followed from the work of
Belsky et al. (1984) and Slade (1987) on the relation between security of attachment
and symbolic play.

Method

Participants.  Participants  were  33  children  (13  girls  and  20  boys)  from  the
Cambridge area who had been assessed on the strange situation procedure as part of
an earlier longitudinal study (Meins, 1992). Mothers and children were recruited via
local  general  practitioners  and  health  visitors,  and  80%  of  mothers  who  were
approached agreed to participate.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

Attachment and Mentalising Abilities 5

Assessment of security of attachment. Children were assessed on the strange situation
procedure  (Ainsworth  &  Wittig,  1969)  at  11  or  13  months.  Children’s  security  of
attachment  was  assessed  at  one  of  two  ages  since  these  infants  were  originally
recruited onto a cross-sectional study on the relationship between security of attach-
ment  and  early  cognitive  development.  One  group  of  participants  (n 5 16)  was
tested at 11 months, and the other (n 5 17) at 13 months. Of the 33 participants, 19
(9 boys, 10 girls) were classiﬁed as securely attached (Type B) and the remaining 14
(11 boys, 3 girls) as insecurely attached (Types A, C and D). The breakdown of the
insecure  group  was  as  follows:  6  children  were  insecure-avoidant  (Type  A);  4  chil-
dren  were  insecure-resistant  (Type  C);  and  4  children  were  insecure-disorganised
(Type D).2 All of the tapes were scored by the ﬁrst author3 and a random quarter
was coded for a second time by an independent trained rater. Cohen’s Kappa (k) for
inter-rater  agreement  was  0.81,  and  the  remaining  disagreements  were  resolved  by
discussion.

Assessment of socio-economic status (SES). The measure of SES was based on mater-
nal  education,  mother’s  present/previous  occupation  and  father’s  occupation
(Mueller  &  Parcel,  1981).  That  is,  a  family  was  considered  to  be  ‘status  1’  if  both
parents had manual/unskilled jobs and the mother had left school at the minimum
leaving  age,  or  ‘status  2’  if  both  parents  were  in  professional/managerial  positions
and the mother had either gone on to further education or had qualiﬁed to do so.
No problematic combinations arose in the sample. Of the 33 participants, 13 (8 from
the  secure  and  5  from  the  insecure  group)  were  classiﬁed  as  status  1,  and  20  (11
secure and 9 insecure) as status 2. A chi-square test showed no relationship between
security  of  attachment  and  SES,  x2 (1,  N 5 33)  5 0.14,  n.s.,  suggesting  that  these
two factors are independent in this sample.

Assessment at 31 months: symbolic play. The mean age of the children at this testing
phase was 31 months (range: 30 months to 33 months). Data on symbolic play were
not available for one of the children (insecure, status 2), since there was a technical
problem during the recording of this play session. The set of objects used in the sym-
bolic play task consisted of two representational toys (a toy car and a female doll)
and a selection of ‘junk’ objects, such as a toilet roll inner tube and a piece of alu-
minium foil (see Table 1).

The study was performed in the child’s home, and involved two types of play ses-
sion. The introductory play session started the moment the child made the ﬁrst inten-
tional contact with a toy or junk object and ended after approximately ﬁve minutes.
The  introductory  session  was  immediately  followed  by  the  structured  play  session,
which  involved  two  types  of  structured  play:  elicited and  instructed.  In  the  elicited
condition, the child was given either the car 1 an object or the doll 1 an object and
was  asked  ‘What  can  you  do  with  these?’.  When  the  child  had  performed  some
action  with  the  objects  in  question,  or  if  it  became  clear  that  no  action  would  be 
performed, the experimenter asked the child to perform a speciﬁc act, such as using
the  aluminium  foil  as  a  mirror  for  the  doll—this  was  the  instructed  condition  (see
Table 1).

The order of presentation of the toy-object pairs was randomised, and the sessions
were video-taped. All of the sessions were scored by the ﬁrst author, and 19 sessions
were randomly selected and scored by a second coder, who was blind to the attach-
ment classiﬁcations of the children. The inter-rater agreement for the level of sophis-
tication of play (see below) was k 5 0.91.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

6 Elizabeth Meins et al.

Table 1. Questions for Instructed Pretend Play

Selection of toys

Instructed question

Car 1 cardboard box
Car 1 cardboard strip
Car 1 coffee jar lid
Car 1 inner tube
Car 1 7 bricks
Doll 1 lunch box
Doll 1 bun case
Doll 1 aluminium foil
Doll 1 blue napkin

Make the car go in the garage
Make the car drive along the road
Make the car go round the roundabout
Make the car go through the tunnel
Make a car park for the car to park in

Make the doll have a bath
Make the doll eat her dinner off the plate
Make the doll look at herself in the mirror
Make the doll go for a swim in the pool

Coding  of  symbolic  play.  The  child’s  play  was  scored  for  each  car-junk  object  and
each  doll-junk  object  pair  following  criteria  adapted  from  Lewis  and  Boucher
(1988). Scores ranged from 0 to 4 for each toy-object pair (a sample of the scoring
criteria are shown in Table 2). For example, the child received a score of 0 if he or
she played with only one of the objects, such as pushing the car along the ﬂoor. To
receive a score of 2 or 3, the child had to show a meaningful interaction between the
toy and the junk object, but fall short of understanding the ﬁner details of what was
required.  For  example,  when  given  the  car  and  the  toilet  roll  inner  tube,  the  child
may have held the tube at right angles to the ﬂoor and then dropped the car into the
tube. To score a maximum 4, the child had to place the tube on its side on the ﬂoor,
push the car into the tube, and then ‘drive’ the car out of the other end. The same
scoring criteria were used for both the elicited and instructed play conditions. It was
therefore possible for a child to receive a maximum score in the elicited condition, if
he  or  she  performed  the  criterial  sequence  of  actions.  In  practice,  children  rarely
received a maximum score on any of the toy-object pairings in the elicited condition.
Each child was given two scores: the ﬁrst was the total from the elicited play con-
dition;  the  second  the  total  from  the  instructed  play  condition.  For  example,  if  a
child had received a score of 1 for all nine of the toy-junk object pairs in the elicited
condition (see Table 1), then his or her total elicited play score would be 9. If this
child  then  received  a  score  of  4  for  all  nine  toy-object  pairs  in  the  instructed  play
condition, the total instructed play score would be 36. Thirty-six was the maximum
total  score  that  any  child  could  receive.  In  order  to  control  for  the  possibility  of
inﬂated improvement measures among children scoring very low on the elicited con-
dition, the potential number of levels through which the child could advance from
the elicited play level for each pair of objects was recorded and totalled. Thus, in the
above  example,  the  potential  number  of  levels  through  which  the  child  could
advance  in  order  to  receive  a  maximum  score  would  be  27  (i.e.  3  3 9).  Following
Belsky et al. (1984), these measures were expressed as a single total for each child,
using the formula:

Total score instructed play—Total score elicited play

Total number of levels remaining above elicited play levels

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

Belsky et al. (1984) used the term ‘executive capacity’ to describe this composite
score, in that it provides a measure of ‘the infant’s capacity to execute, in a self-initi-
ated manner, his or her most advanced level of functioning’ (p. 407).

Attachment and Mentalising Abilities 7

Table 2. A Sample of the Scoring Criteria Used in the Symbolic Play Task

Toy car
Inner tube ‘tunnel’

Toy doll
Lunch box ‘bath’

0 pushes car along ﬂoor
1 pushes  car  over  the  tube,  or  some  other  interaction

between the two objects
tube held upright on ﬂoor, car dropped in
tube on ﬂoor on its side, car pushed along into it
as 3, but ‘drives’ car out

2
3
4

0 plays with doll
1 places box in correct orientation
2
3 places doll in box
4 prepares  doll  for  bath  and  places  her  in  box,  or

some interaction between doll and box

‘splashing/ washing’ doll when in box

Results

Table 3 shows the mean scores for elicited and instructed play and executive capacity
for the two attachment and two SES groups. A 2 (security of attachment) 3 2 (SES)
analysis of variance was performed on the executive capacity scores. This resulted in
a  main  effect  of  security  of  attachment,  F(1,  28)  5 17.61,  MStreatment 5 0.86,  p ,
.001,  with  no  effect  of  SES, F(1,  28)  5 0.01,  n.s.,  and  no  interaction  between  SES
and security of attachment.

Actual levels of play under the two conditions were then analysed. A 2 (security of
attachment) 3 2 (SES) 3 2 (type of play) mixed analysis of variance resulted in main
effects of security of attachment, F(1, 28) 5 5.06, MStreatment 5 247.6, p , .05, and
type  of  play,  F(1,  28)  5 60.74,  MStreatment 5 1376.5,  p , .001,  with  a  signiﬁcant
interaction  between  these  two  factors,  F(1,  28)  5 11.29,  MStreatment 5 255.9,  p ,
.005. There was no main effect of SES, F(1, 28) 5 0.40, n.s., and no other interac-
tions. Post hoc comparisons using the Bonferroni adjustment of a showed a differ-
ence between the secure and insecure groups on instructed play,  t(30)  5 3.44, p ,
.005, but no difference on elicited play, t(30) 5 0.26, n.s.

The  results  showed  that  securely  attached  children  attained  higher  executive
capacity scores than their insecurely attached peers, and seemed to be more able or
willing to respond to the pretence suggestions of the experimenter. These differences
between the secure and insecure groups were not due to differences in SES, nor any
difference in the two groups’ sophistication of solo (elicited) play.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

8 Elizabeth Meins et al.
Table 3. Mean Play Scores as a Function of Security of Attachment and SES

Attachment classiﬁcation

SES

Secure
(n 5 19)

Insecure
(n 5 13)

Status 1
(n 5 13)

Status 2
(n 5 19)

Elicited Play

M
SD

Instructed Play

M
SD

Executive Capacity

M
SD

7.53
4.64

21.26
6.81

0.55
0.25

7.08
4.87

12.54
7.41

0.16
0.23

6.15
3.76

17.08
5.31

0.39
0.28

8.16
5.12

18.16
9.81

0.40
0.33

Note. Maximum play score 5 36 (i.e. 9 toy-object pairs 3 4 play levels).

Study Two4

The  purpose  of  Study  Two  was  to  investigate  whether  there  were  any  differences
between  the  two  attachment  groups  in  maternal  behaviour  on  a  tutoring  task.
Mothers who met the criteria for sensitive tutoring were, by deﬁnition, better able to
pitch  their  interventions  at  the  child’s  ‘zone  of  proximal  development’  (Vygotsky,
1978), which was assumed to require an attunement to the child’s ongoing difﬁcul-
ties and areas of competence. Our hypothesis was that secure group mothers would
be  more  sensitive  tutors,  and  that  this  greater  sensitivity  would  be  due  in  part  to
their  proclivity  to  treat  their  children  as  mental  agents.  This  proclivity  was  also
assessed in a brief maternal interview, where mothers were simply asked to describe
their children. It was hypothesised that secure group mothers would be more likely
to describe their children in terms of their mental characteristics, rather than behav-
ioural or physical attributes.

Method

Participants.  Participants  were  30  of  the  original  sample  who  took  part  in  Study
One: 17 (8 girls, 9 boys) were securely attached and 13 (2 girls, 11 boys) were inse-
curely attached. With respect to SES, 12 (7 secure and 5 insecure) were status 1 and
18  (10  secure  and  8  insecure)  were  status  2.  The  mean  age  of  the  children  was  37
months (range: 35 months to 38 months). Both of the assessments at age 3 were con-
ducted in a single laboratory session.

Maternal tutoring sensitivity (box construction task). The aim of the box construction
task was to obtain a measure of the mother’s sensitivity to her child’s needs within
the  context  of  a  tutoring  task.  The  task  was  to  build  a  box  identical  to  a  model
which  had  already  been  assembled,  using  eight  Polydron squares  which  snapped

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

Attachment and Mentalising Abilities 9

together. Each mother was told that the task would be too difﬁcult for the child to
accomplish  alone,  and  that  she  could  give  as  much  or  as  little  help  as  she  liked.
Participants  were  allowed  to  work  on  the  box  construction  for  as  long  as  they
wished, and the session only ended if they gave up or if the box was completed. All
of the sessions were video-taped for later coding.

Each  intervention  made  by  the  mother  during  the  task  was  assigned  a  level  of
speciﬁcity, according to the following criteria: Level 1: orienting suggestions, focus-
ing strategies, general rules and comments, e.g. ‘Let’s start with the bottom’; Level 2:
suggestions about speciﬁc pieces, locations or actions, but not combinations of the
three, e.g. ‘Find a red one like this’; Level 3: solutions—suggestions indicating which
piece should be used and where to put it, e.g. ‘That piece ﬁts in here’; Level 4: physi-
cal help—the mother physically aids the child in completing a section, e.g. holding
one  square  in  place  whilst  the  child  attaches  another;  Level  5:  demonstration—the
mother performs an operation by herself. Certain aspects of this scoring procedure
were  adapted  from  Bee,  van  Egeren,  Pytkowicz  Streissguth,  Nyman  and  Leckie
(1969) and Wood and Middleton (1975).

A mother’s sensitivity to feedback was deﬁned in terms of her ability to change the
level of speciﬁcity of her instruction in response to the child’s ability to follow the
preceding instruction successfully, whilst obeying the rules below. In order for use of
feedback to be successful:

1. if the child succeeds at a given level of speciﬁcity, the next instruction should be at

the same level or at a lower level of speciﬁcity.

2. (a) if the child fails at a given level of speciﬁcity, the next instruction should be

given at a higher level of speciﬁcity.

(b) if the child fails at a given level of speciﬁcity, the next instruction should be no

more than two levels above the previous level of speciﬁcity.

Parts 1 and 2(a) are equivalent to Wood, Wood and Middleton’s (1978) ‘contingency
rule’. In Part 2(b), we limited the permitted jump in speciﬁcity to two levels above
that of the previous intervention. Maternal sensitivity scores were calculated accord-
ing to how well the mother was able to follow this rule (see below). All of the tapes
were coded by the ﬁrst author, and a random quarter of the sessions was scored by a
second rater who was blind to the attachment classiﬁcations. Inter-rater agreement
for the level of speciﬁcity of instruction was k 5 0.96.

Maternal interview. The aim of the maternal interview was to assess mothers’ inclina-
tion to use mental characteristics in describing their children. After the tutoring task
had  been  completed,  video  recording  was  stopped  and  each  mother  was  given  a
short  interview.  The  mother  was  simply  asked:  ‘Can  you  describe  [child]  for  me?’.
Mothers were given no guidance on how to respond, and if they asked for clariﬁca-
tion on what kind of answer was required, they were told that there were no right or
wrong answers, and that they could talk about any of their children’s characteristics.
These  interviews  were  audio-taped,  and  mothers’  answers  transcribed  verbatim.
Criteria were then established to assess the extent to which mothers described their
children in terms of mental, behavioural and physical characteristics. Each time the
mother mentioned an attribute of her child, it was entered into one of the following
categories:

1. Mental: Any reference to the child’s mental life, relating to will, mind, imagina-
tion,  interest,  intellect,  metacognition,  e.g.  ‘caring’;  ‘he  shows  respect  for  other 

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

10 Elizabeth Meins et al.

people’; ‘she’s got a mind of her own’. Any comments relating to desires, wishes
and emotions (but not merely in terms of describing the child’s likes and dislikes
or behavioural tendencies) were also included, e.g. ‘she’d like a baby brother or
sister’  would  be  classed  as  a  mental  characteristic,  but  ‘he  loves  playing  games’
would not.

2. Behavioural:  Any  reference  to  behaviour,  such  as  games,  activities  that  the 
child  liked  to  do  and  interactions  with  others  on  a  behavioural  level,  e.g.  ‘she 
likes counting’; ‘he prefers playing with other children than by himself’. The fol-
lowing characteristics were also deemed to be behavioural, in that a purely non-
mentalistic  interpretation  was  possible  in  each  case:  lively, talkative, boisterous,
aggressive, passive, friendly, restrained, out-going, naughty.

3. Physical: Any physical attributes, the child’s age and descriptions relating to the
child’s position in the family, e.g. ‘blond’; ‘three feet tall’; ‘he’s my second son’;
‘she’s three years old’.

4. General:  Any  general  comments  relating  to  the  child  which  did  not  ﬁt  into  the

above three categories, e.g. ‘he’s a lovely little boy’; ‘he’s a child of extremes’.

These categories were both exhaustive and exclusive. The total number of attributes
used by each mother to describe her child was computed. Mothers then received a
score for their use of mental characteristics, expressed as the number of mental char-
acteristics divided by the total number of attributes used to describe the child. This
proportional  score  was  intended  to  control  for  differences  in  verbosity  between
mothers. All of the interviews were coded by the ﬁrst and second authors. In order
to minimise bias due to the ﬁrst coder’s knowledge of children’s attachment classiﬁ-
cations, interviews were transcribed and coded anonymously, and were only subse-
quently  integrated  with  attachment  data.  The  second  coder  remained  blind  to  the
children’s  attachment  classiﬁcations  throughout.  Inter-rater  agreement  for  the
assignment of a comment to one of the four categories was k 5 0.91.

Results

Maternal tutoring sensitivity. The total number of interventions (physical and verbal)
on the tutoring task was calculated for each mother. Scores for maternal sensitivity
to feedback were obtained by dividing a mother’s successful use of feedback (accord-
ing to the rules outlined above) by her total number of interventions. The mean sen-
sitivity scores for the security of attachment and SES groups were as follows: secure
group M 5 0.66, SD 5 0.23; insecure group M 5 0.45, SD 5 0.16; status 1 group M
5 0.59, SD 5 0.25; status 2 group M 5 0.56, SD 5 0.21. A 2 (security of attach-
ment) 3 2 (SES) analysis of variance showed a main effect of security of attachment,
F(1,26)  5 8.37, MStreatment 5 0.36, p , .01, with no effect of SES, F(1,26)  5 0.07,
n.s., and no interaction.

Mothers in the secure group were thus more likely to use feedback from their chil-
dren’s performance in order to gauge the level of speciﬁcity of their succeeding inter-
ventions.  This  difference  between  the  mothers  in  the  secure  and  insecure  groups
could not be explained in terms of SES.

Maternal interview. Table 4 shows the mean scores for the total number of attributes
and for the proportion of mental attributes from the two attachment and two SES
groups. For the mean total number of attributes, a 2 (security of attachment)  3 2
(SES) analysis of variance showed a main effect of SES, F(1, 26) 5 6.20, MStreatment

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

Attachment and Mentalising Abilities 11
5 69.5, p , .025, with more attributes given by status 2 mothers, but no effect of
security of attachment, F(1, 26) 5 1.13, n.s., and no interaction. For the mean pro-
portional scores for mental attributes, a 2 (security of attachment) 3 2 (SES) analy-
sis  of  variance  showed  a  main  effect  of  security  of  attachment,  F(1,  26)  5 6.19,
MStreatment 5 0.40,  p , .025,  with  no  effect  of  SES,  F(1,  26)  5 0.02,  n.s.,  and  no
interaction.

Table 4. Mean Proportions of Mentalistic Attributes on the Maternal Interview as a
Function of Security of Attachment and SES

Attachment classiﬁcation

SES

Secure
(n 5 17)

Insecure
(n 5 13)

Status 1
(n 5 12)

Status 2
(n 5 18)

Total number of attributes

M
SD

6.53
3.71

Proportion of mental attributes

M
SD

0.48
0.28

7.77
3.59

0.24
0.18

5.08
2.54

0.39
0.27

8.39
3.73

0.37
0.28

Mothers  of  securely  attached  children  were  thus  more  likely  than  their  counter-
parts in the insecure group to focus on mental characteristics when asked to give a
description of their children. This difference appeared to be independent of SES, and
could  not  be  explained  in  terms  of  the  secure  group  mothers  being  more  verbose
than those in the insecure group.

Study Three

The  purpose  of  Study  Three  was  to  investigate  whether  securely  attached  children
would show an advantage over their insecurely attached peers in their understanding
of the mental states of a story protagonist, as assessed on a version of Wimmer and
Perner’s (1983) unexpected transfer task. In this task, the participant hears a story
about a character who hides a desirable object in one location and then leaves the
scene. In the protagonist’s absence, the object is moved from its original location to
a second location. The child is ﬁrst asked control questions to ensure that he or she
remembers  the  details  of  the  story,  and  is  aware  that  the  protagonist  has  not  wit-
nessed the transfer. Participants are then asked to predict where the protagonist will
look  for  the  hidden  object.  This  task  is  taken  to  be  a  test  of  mentalising  abilities
because it requires the child to represent the mental states of another person in order
to predict that person’s subsequent behaviour.

Method
Participants. Twenty-ﬁve5 of the children who had participated in Studies One and
Two  were  available  for  testing  at  age  4.  Fifteen  (9  girls,  6  boys)  of  these  children

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

12 Elizabeth Meins et al.

were  securely  attached  and  10  (2  girls,  8  boys)  were  insecurely  attached.  Eight  (6
secure, 2 insecure) of these children were status 1 and 17 (9 secure, 8 insecure) were
status 2. Children’s mean age was 49 months (range 48 to 50 months).

Unexpected  transfer  task.  Participants  were  introduced  to  a  soft  toy  called  Charlie
the  Crocodile  and  told  that  Charlie’s  favourite  food  was  chocolate.  The  child  wit-
nessed a chocolate being placed in one of two small cardboard boxes, one red and
the  other  white.  The  child  was  then  told  that  Charlie  was  hiding  his  chocolate  to
keep it safe while he went for a swim. Charlie was then removed from the table, and
it was announced that the experimenter and the child were going to play a trick on
Charlie. The child watched while the experimenter took the chocolate out of the box
in  which  it  had  been  hidden  and  placed  it  in  the  other  box,  closing  both  lids.
Participants were told that Charlie was about to return from his swim, and that he
would  be  wanting  his  chocolate.  The  following  control  questions  were  then  asked:
‘Where was the chocolate in the beginning?’ (memory control); ‘Where is the choco-
late now?’ (reality control); and ‘Does Charlie know where the chocolate is?’ (know-
ledge  control).  If  any  of  these  questions  was  answered  incorrectly,  the  story  was
brieﬂy repeated and the three questions asked again, but the child was not explicitly
corrected.  Children  who  failed  to  answer  correctly  the  second  time  were  excluded
from the analysis. When correct answers had been given on each of these three ques-
tions, the test question was asked: ‘Where does Charlie think the chocolate is?’6

The children were divided into two groups, according to whether they passed or
failed the test question. In order to be assigned to the ‘pass’ group, children had to
indicate the box which, in reality, did not contain the chocolate.

Results

Four  children  (3  secure  and  1  insecure)  failed  to  answer  the  ‘knowledge’  control
question  correctly  on  the  second  asking,  and  were  therefore  excluded  from  the
analysis.  Of  the  remaining  participants,  10  out  of  12  securely  attached  children
(83%)  answered  the  test  question  correctly,  compared  with  3  out  of  9  insecurely
attached children (33%). A Fisher exact probability test showed the effect of security
of attachment to be signiﬁcant at the 0.025 level.7 Three of the 6 status 1 children
(50%) answered the test question correctly, compared with 10 of the 15 status 2 chil-
dren  (66%),  which  represented  a  non-signiﬁcant  difference  between  the  two  SES
groups.

Further  analyses  were  performed  to  establish  whether  any  of  the  measures
obtained  in  Studies  One  and  Two  were  related  to  performance  on  the  unexpected
transfer  task.  Mean  executive  capacity  scores  (Study  One)  for  the  pass  and  fail
groups are shown in Table 5. A t-test showed the difference between the executive
capacity  scores  of  these  two  groups  to  be  signiﬁcant,  t(18)  5 2.79,  p , .01,  one-
tailed.  Children  who  passed  the  unexpected  transfer  task  at  age  4  had  been  better
able to incorporate the experimenter’s suggestions during the symbolic play task at
31 months.

Table  5  also  shows  the  mean  scores  for  the  measures  taken  from  the  maternal
tutoring  task  and  maternal  interview  in  Study  Two.  T-tests  showed  a  difference
between the pass and fail groups on the maternal sensitivity scores, t(18) 5 1.95, p ,
.05,  one-tailed,  and  on  the  mothers’  proportional  mental  attribute  scores,  t(18)  5
1.70, p , .05, one-tailed. Children who passed the unexpected transfer task at age 4

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

Attachment and Mentalising Abilities 13

Table 5. Mean Executive Capacity, Maternal Sensitivity and Maternal
Mental  Attribute  Scores  Related  to  Performance  on  the  Unexpected
Transfer Task

Performance on unexpected
transfer task

Pass

Fail

Executive capacity

M
SD

Maternal sensitivity

M
SD

Proportion of mental attributes

M
SD

0.53
0.22

0.70
0.23

0.46
0.29

0.23
0.26

0.51
0.20

0.25
0.24

were more likely to have mothers who, at age 3, had been more sensitive tutors and
tended to describe their children in terms of their mental characteristics.

Study Four

The purpose of Study Four was to follow up the mentalising assessments made in
the previous study, by administering more complex mentalising tasks at age 5. The
ﬁrst of these tasks, the ‘picture identiﬁcation’ task, was designed to assess children’s
understanding  that  one’s  knowledge  about  a  state  of  affairs  is  constrained  by  the
information available. The second task, the ‘false belief and emotion’ task, required
participants to integrate information about a story protagonist’s beliefs with infor-
mation about the same protagonist’s preferences, in order to predict the character’s
emotional response. Both tasks had previously been shown to be appropriate to chil-
dren  of  this  age.  Study  Four  also  presented  an  opportunity  to  assess  participants’
general cognitive ability, as measured by a test of receptive verbal intelligence.

Method

Participants. All 33 children who had taken part in Study One were available for the
follow-up  studies  at  age  5.  Children’s  mean  age  was  61.5  months  (range  60  to  63
months).

Participants  were  tested  in  two  sessions  a  week  apart.  In  the  ﬁrst  session,  the
British  Picture  Vocabulary  Scale  (Dunn,  Dunn,  Whetton  &  Pintilie,  1982)  was
administered,  followed  by  the  picture  identiﬁcation  task  (Taylor,  Cartwright  &
Bowden, 1991), described below. In the second session, the false belief and emotion
task  (Harris,  Johnson,  Hutton,  Andrews  &  Cooke,  1989)  was  administered  (see
below).

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

14 Elizabeth Meins et al.

Picture Identiﬁcation Task. The purpose of this task was to assess children’s under-
standing  of  how  an  individual’s  knowledge  is  constrained  by  informational  access.
Participants were ﬁrst introduced to a soft toy called Freddy the Frog and the box in
which he lived. Freddy was placed in his box, and participants were told that they
were going to see some pictures. Each of six pictures had been glued to the inside of
an opaque folder, with a 2.5 inch square ‘window’ cut from its front cover, allowing
one of three kinds of view. For two of the pictures, the visible part was sufﬁcient to
allow the child to identify the picture (for example, if the picture was of a dog, the
dog’s head was visible in the window). In the second pair of pictures, the visible part
of the picture was insufﬁcient to allow identiﬁcation (‘nondescript’ view). In the ﬁnal
pair of pictures, the window was cut so that no part of the picture was visible.

The order of presentation of the pictures was randomised. The closed folder was
shown to the child, who was asked what he or she thought was in the picture. The
experimenter then opened the folder to show what was actually in the picture, and
closed the folder again. Freddy the Frog was then taken out of his box and placed in
front  of  the  closed  folder.  The  child  was  asked:  ‘Does  Freddy  know  what’s  in  the
picture?’

The number of ‘no’ responses to the nondescript views was taken as a measure of
the  child’s  understanding  of  the  relation  between  informational  access  and  know-
ledge of picture content. Children who demonstrated a general negative or positive
response bias (i.e. answering all questions with ‘yes’ or ‘no’) were excluded from the
analysis.

False  belief  and  emotion  task.  The  ﬁnal  task  assessed  young  children’s  ability  to
understand not only a character’s current belief, but also to integrate this informa-
tion with previous knowledge about the character’s preferences and desires in order
to predict an emotional response. Children were introduced to four named toy ani-
mals,  and  told  that  another  character,  Charlie  the  Crocodile,  was  going  to  play  a
trick  on  each  of  the  animals  in  turn.  For  each  animal,  participants  heard  a  story
about  one  of  the  animal’s  favourite  food.  For  example,  participants  were  told,
‘Penny the Penguin wants a drink, but she only likes one kind of drink, and that’s
milk  (pointing  to  a  carton  of  milk).  She  doesn’t  like  Coke  (pointing  to  a  can  of
Coke); she only likes milk’. Penny the Penguin was then removed from the table, and
Charlie the Crocodile was seen to pour the milk from its carton and replace it with
the Coke. All of the containers used in the experiment were opaque. The child was
then asked: ‘What is Penny’s favourite drink?’ (memory control); and ‘What is actu-
ally in the carton now?’ (reality control). If either of these questions was answered
incorrectly,  the  scenario  was  brieﬂy  redescribed.  Penny  was  then  returned  to  the
table, and the following questions asked: Question 1: ‘How does Penny feel when she
is ﬁrst given the carton? Does she feel happy or does she feel sad?’ Question 2: ‘How
does Penny feel when she looks inside the carton and ﬁnds there is Coke instead of
milk inside? Does she feel happy or does she feel sad?’

The  measure  of  performance  was  the  number  of  correct  answers  to  Question  1
(maximum score 5 4). Any children who showed a general bias towards positive or
negative answers were excluded from the analysis. In addition, children were asked
to justify their answers to Questions 1 and 2. If these justiﬁcations suggested that the
child  had  forgotten  the  animal’s  preference  or  the  nature  of  the  trick,  the  salient
information was repeated and the questions reiterated. Within each testing session,
two of the animals were given an unpleasant surprise (as in Penny’s case), while the

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

other  two  were  given  a  pleasant  surprise  (the  container  of  non-favourite  food  was
found to contain a favourite food). Presentation of the stories was fully randomised
and counterbalanced.

Attachment and Mentalising Abilities 15

Results

General  cognitive  ability.  Security-based  and  SES-based  differences  on  the  BPVS
were investigated. The mean standardised scores were as follows: secure group M 5
113.3, SD 5 12.5; insecure group M 5 110.9, SD 5 15.5; status 1 group M 5 105.2,
SD 5 12.9; status 2 group M 5 116.9, SD 5 12.4. A t-test showed no effect of secu-
rity of attachment on BPVS scores, t(31) 5 0.48, n.s. The difference between the two
SES groups was signiﬁcant, t(31) 5 2.60, p , .01, one-tailed, with children from sta-
tus  2  families  attaining  higher  scores.  Table  6  shows  the  correlations  between  the
BPVS scores and the other measures taken in the four studies reported here.

Picture identiﬁcation task. Five children (3 secure and 2 insecure) were excluded from
the analyses because of a negative response bias, and 3 children (1 secure and 2 inse-
cure) were excluded due to a positive response bias. Two further securely attached
children gave a single incorrect answer to the control question, and were excluded.
Of the remainder, 11 out of 13 securely attached children (85%) received a maximum
score of two correct answers for the nondescript views, compared with 5 out of 10
insecurely attached children (50%). This difference was signiﬁcant, x2 (1, N 5 23) 5
3.20, p , .05, one-tailed. The mean correct scores for the two attachment groups on
the  two  nondescript  pictures  were  as  follows:  secure  group  M 5 1.77,  SD 5 0.60,
insecure  group  M 5 1.10,  SD 5 0.99.  Given  the  non-continuous  nature  of  the
dependent  variable,  non-parametric  tests  were  used  in  analysing  these  data.  A
Mann-Whitney  U-test  showed  the  difference  between  the  two  groups  to  be
approaching signiﬁcance, U(10, 13)  5 41, p 5 .07, one-tailed. No differences were
found between the two SES groups on mean correct answers or number of children
receiving a maximum score.

False  belief  and  emotion  task.  Two  children  from  the  secure  group  were  excluded
from the analysis because of a negative response bias which led to incorrect answers
to Question 2. Two children in the insecure group answered Question 2 incorrectly
on one of the four stories. Rather than excluding them from the analysis, the pro-
portion of correct Question 1 answers for the remaining three stories was calculated
and  then  multiplied  by  four  (maximum  score  5 4).  The  mean  number  of  correct
answers  given  by  the  two  groups  were  as  follows:  secure  group  M 5 2.25,  SD 5
1.44; insecure group M 5 1.62, SD 5 1.33. Again, given the nature of the dependent
variable, non-parametric tests were used in analysing these data. A Mann-Whitney
U-test showed the difference between the two groups to be non-signiﬁcant, U(14, 16)
5 86, n.s.

The mean number of correct answers of the two SES groups were also compared:
status 1 group M 5 1.11, SD 5 0.80; status 2 group M 5 2.52, SD 5 1.45. This rep-
resented a signiﬁcant difference, U(12, 18)  5 43.5, p , .01, two-tailed. In order to
identify the best predictor of children’s performance on the false belief and emotion
task,  a  multiple  forward  regression  analysis  was  performed,  incorporating  six  fac-
tors:  security  of  attachment,  SES,  executive  capacity,  proportion  of  mental  attrib-
utes,  performance  on  the  unexpected  transfer  task,  and  BPVS  score.  This  analysis
showed that, when these other variables were entered into the equation, SES did not

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

16 Elizabeth Meins et al.

remain a signiﬁcant predictor of children’s performance on the false belief and emo-
tion  task.  The  best  predictor  of  performance  on  this  task  was  performance  on  the
unexpected transfer task at age 4 (T 5 2.16, p , .05).

Table 6. Correlations between Measures from Studies One, Two, Three and Four

Security

Excap MS

Pment UT

FBE

BPVS

Security
Excap
MS
Pment
UT
FBE
BPVS

1.00
0.63††
0.55†
0.42**
0.51**
0.23
0.09

1.00
0.46**
0.54†
0.55**
0.16
0.43*

1.00
0.30
0.42*
0.29
0.09

1.00
0.37
0.48**
0.09

1.00
0.41*
0.47*

1.00
0.20

1.00

Note. Security 5 security of attachment, Excap 5 executive capacity, MS 5 maternal
sensitivity, Pment 5 proportion of mental attributes, UT 5 unexpected transfer task, FBE 5
false belief and emotion task, BPVS 5 British Picture Vocabulary Scale.
*p , .05; **p , .025; †p , .005, ††p , .001. Signiﬁcance levels are for one-tailed tests, except
those involving the BPVS scores (two-tailed).

Path Analysis

Table  6  shows  the  correlations  between  the  measures  taken  in  the  four  studies
reported above. Children’s performance on the picture identiﬁcation task was found
to  be  correlated  with  only  one  of  the  measures  taken  on  the  other  tasks  reported
here: the proportion of mental attributes on the maternal interview (see Study Two),
where r(21) 5 0.40, p , .025, one-tailed. For the purposes of simplicity of analysis,
scores  on  the  picture  identiﬁcation  task  were  not  entered  into  the  further  analyses
described below.

In light of the observed relationships between these measures, path analyses were
used  to  determine  more  precisely  the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  infantile
attachment  security  and  later  symbolic  and  mentalising  abilities.  Using  the  data
from  Studies  One  to  Four,  Pearson  product  moment  correlations  were  calculated
using  pairwise  deletion  of  missing  values  (see  Table  6).  A  path  analysis  was  con-
ducted on the data using LISREL 7.17 (Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1989). The data were
entered as a covariance matrix with pairwise deletion of missing values. Two models
were tested, as described below.

Model 1

Our prediction of a relationship between security of attachment and later symbolic
and  mentalising  abilities  stemmed  from  previous  suggestions  that  mothers  of
securely  attached  children  are:  (a) more  sensitive  to  their  children’s  needs  and  cur-
rent levels of functioning (measured here as maternal sensitivity on a tutoring task);
and (b) more likely to treat their children as individuals with minds (measured here
in  terms  of  mothers’  proclivity  to  use  mental  attributes  to  describe  their  children).

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

Attachment and Mentalising Abilities 17

Model 1 (see Figure 1) shows a possible pathway between these variables, illustrat-
ing how they might in turn be related to children’s ability to incorporate the sugges-
tions of another into their symbolic play. Our assumption, which needs to be tested
by future research, is that mothers’ tendency to treat their children as mental agents
is  relatively  stable  over  the  preschool  years,  allowing  us  to  extrapolate  back  into
infancy from the ‘mental attributes’ measure taken at age 3. This model also illus-
trates a possible direct link between the security of the attachment relationship and
children’s later mentalising abilities. This model ﬁtted the data using the maximum
likelihood criteria, x2(10) 5 16.45, p 5 0.09. The goodness of ﬁt index was 0.908 and
the stability index was 1.326.

Maternal
Sensitivity

0.102

*
7
4
5
.
0

*

3

6

0 .3

8
8
0
.
0

Security of
Attachment

0.4

*

7

3

6
8
0
.
0

BPVS

Unexpected
Transfer Task

0.430*

Mental

Attributes

0.472*

*

9

6

0 . 3

0.817*

0.308*

0.409*

0.557*

Executive 
Capacity

0.385*

0.832*

False Belief and
Emotion Task

Figure 1. Model 1: Developmental pathways from infantile security of attachment to symbolic and men-
talising abilities in early childhood

Model 2

One  implication  of  Model  1  was  that  the  role  of  caregivers  in  the  development  of
mentalising abilities is primarily mediated by the security of the attachment relation-
ship, rather than by any direct inﬂuence on children’s developing understanding of
other minds. However, it is also plausible that there might be a more direct effect of
caregivers’  proclivity  to  treat  their  infants  as  individuals  with  minds.  Accordingly,
two extra paths were added to Model 1: from maternal mental attributes to both the
unexpected transfer task and to the false belief and emotion task (see Figure 2). The
values which have been altered between the two models are shown in bold print.

The new model showed an improved ﬁt to the data, using the maximum likelihood
criteria, x2 (8) 5 8.6, p 5 .38. The model had a goodness of ﬁt index of 0.946 and a
stability index of 5.13. This model provided a signiﬁcant improvement on the earlier
model, x2 (2) 5 7.85, p , .02.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

18 Elizabeth Meins et al.

Maternal
Sensitivity

0.102

*
7
4
5
.
0

*

3

6

0 .3

0.817*

0.308*

Mental

Attributes

0.385*

8
8
0
.
0

Security of
Attachment

6
8
0
.
0

BPVS

0.472*

6
6
1
.
0

*

9

6

0 . 3

Executive 
Capacity

0
.
3

8

4

*

0709*

0.4

*

0

5

Unexpected
Transfer Task

0.423*

False Belief and
Emotion Task

0.266

0.538*

Figure 2. Model 2: Developmental pathways from infantile security of attachment to symbolic and men-
talising abilities in early childhood

These exploratory analyses provide some support for the suggestion that mothers’
willingness to treat their children as mental agents (as determined from their descrip-
tions of their children at age 3) directly inﬂuences the later development of mentalis-
ing  abilities.  In  turn,  this  willingness  is  strongly  related  to  the  security  of  the
attachment  relationship.  This  tentative  conclusion  should  be  considered  in  light  of
the need for further research, particularly concerning whether this differential will-
ingness on the part of mothers can be detected in infancy. An obvious problem in
interpreting these analyses is the low statistical power resulting from the size of the
sample.  One  might  expect  that  even  if  the  data  did  deviate  signiﬁcantly  from  the
model, such a deviation would not show up due to the small sample size. That said,
the  highly  signiﬁcant  correlations  shown  in  Table  6,  coupled  with  the  signiﬁcant
improvement observed in Model 2, suggest that power was sufﬁcient if not optimal.

General Discussion

The studies reported above showed that: (a) children who received a secure attach-
ment  classiﬁcation  in  infancy  were  better  able  to  incorporate  the  pretence  sugges-
tions  of  an  experimenter  into  their  play  sequences  at  31  months,  despite  no  group
differences in the level of sophistication of play before the experimenter intervened;
(b) mothers of securely attached children adopted more sensitive tutoring strategies
on a collaborative task at age 3; (c) mothers of securely attached children were more
likely to describe their children in terms of their mental characteristics, rather than
their  physical  or  behavioural  qualities;  (d) children  who  were  securely  attached  in
infancy were more likely to pass a version of the unexpected transfer task at age 4;
and (e) when assessed at age 5, securely attached children were more likely than their

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

Attachment and Mentalising Abilities 19

insecurely attached counterparts to give the maximum number of correct answers on
a  task  requiring  an  understanding  of  informational  access,  while  group  differences
on a task relating belief and emotion were non-signiﬁcant. These security-based dif-
ferences  could  not  be  explained  in  terms  of  general  cognitive  ability  or  SES.
Although  a  difference  between  the  SES  groups  was  found  on  the  false  belief  and
emotion  task  (Study  Four),  a  multiple  regression  analysis  showed  that,  when  the
other  main  independent  variables  were  entered  into  the  equation,  SES  did  not
remain a signiﬁcant predictor of children’s performance.

Lastly, the path analyses shed some light on the developmental pathways which
may  link  security  of  attachment  and  later  symbolic  and  mentalising  abilities.
Security of attachment accounted for a signiﬁcant amount of the variance in the pro-
portion of mental attributes in mothers’ descriptions of their children, and both of
these variables were strong predictors of executive capacity scores on the symbolic
play task. In addition, children’s initial security of attachment was a strong predictor
of performance of the unexpected transfer task at age 4, which, together with moth-
ers’ proclivity to describe their children in mentalistic terms, in turn predicted perfor-
mance on the more advanced mentalising task at age 5.

Before considering the signiﬁcance of these ﬁndings, it should be pointed out that
the results of the tasks administered at ages 4 and 5 are in line with those of previous
researchers, in terms of the proportion of children passing at each age (Harris et al.,
1989;  Taylor  et  al.,  1991;  Wimmer  &  Perner,  1983).  The  failure  to  ﬁnd  a  relation
between security of attachment in infancy and general cognitive ability is also consis-
tent with the ﬁndings of other studies (see van IJzendoorn, Dijkstra & Bus, 1995).
The results of our longitudinal study suggest that the security of the attachment rela-
tionship in infancy, and those mother-centred variables which characterise a secure
attachment  relationship  in  early  childhood,  have  an  important  inﬂuence  on  chil-
dren’s later ability to engage with another person on a mental level. This engagement
may  either  be  with  an  experimenter’s  suggestions  for  symbolic  play  (Study  One),
maternal instructions on how to build a box (Study Two), or with the beliefs, emo-
tions and desires of a range of story characters (Studies Three and Four). Our ﬁnd-
ings  suggest  that,  from  midway  through  the  third  year  of  life,  securely  attached
children  are  better  able  to  recognise  and  act  upon  the  alternative  perspectives  of
another person.

What implications do our ﬁndings have for the four theoretical approaches out-
lined in the Introduction? First, they would appear to present something of a chal-
lenge to the ‘modularist’ account of mentalising development. Indeed, any ﬁnding of
meaningful relationships between early social variables and later mentalising abilities
would appear to present problems for an account which views such abilities as stem-
ming from a primarily biological endowment (Baron-Cohen, 1995; Leslie, 1991). An
obvious line of argument for the modularist would be to say that we are mistaken in
our  description  of  the  direction  of  causation,  and  that  some  infants’  biological
endowment simply matures earlier, resulting in a greater early responsivity which is
picked up by the caregiver and leads to the development of a secure attachment rela-
tionship.  However,  such  an  interpretation  seems  unlikely  for  at  least  two  reasons.
First, mothers would have to be sensitive to early precursors of mentalising abilities
well  before  such  abilities  are  thought,  on  the  modularist  account,  to  mature.
Secondly, such an interpretation would be at odds with ﬁndings that infants may be
differently  attached  to  different  caregivers  within  the  same  family  (e.g.  Belsky  &
Rovine, 1987; Lamb, Hwang, Frodi & Frodi, 1982; Main & Weston, 1982).

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

20 Elizabeth Meins et al.

The  other  three  main  theoretical  alternatives  are  better  placed  to  explain  the
apparent  social  inﬂuences  on  the  development  of  mentalising  abilities.  There  are  a
number of ways in which sensitive caregivers and older family members might ‘scaf-
fold’  (Wood,  Bruner  &  Ross,  1976)  children’s  developing  understanding  of  other
minds. For example, an adherent to the theory-theory might argue that mothers’ use
of mental state terms when interacting with their children might scaffold the acquisi-
tion of the corresponding concepts, which go on to play a role in a fully-ﬂedged the-
ory  of  mind.  A  similar,  and  not  necessarily  exclusive,  view  might  be  taken  of
children’s  entry  into  the  folk  psychology  of  the  culture,  with  such  a  development
being seen as a process of ‘apprenticeship’ in which active participation by the child
is encouraged by the more senior members of the culture (Astington, 1996; Lewis et
al., 1996). An enthusiast for the simulation account might argue that exposure to the
mental states of others, such as would result from a secure attachment relationship,
might  accelerate  the  acquisition  of  a  sufﬁciently  extensive  database  from  which  to
simulate the mental states of others. Finally, the sort of sensitive reciprocal interac-
tion which characterises the secure attachment relationship might be causal in allow-
ing  children  to  internalise  mediated  interpersonal  exchanges  and,  through  the
development of dialogic modes of thinking, actively reconstruct social situations on
a dialogic level (Fernyhough, 1996).

Which speciﬁc features of the secure attachment relationship might be important
in accounting for the differences reported in this study? The most obvious explana-
tion can be framed in terms of the different types of interaction which characterise
secure and insecure attachments. As noted in the Introduction, mothers of securely
attached  infants  are  more  sensitive  (Ainsworth  et  al.,  1971)  and  consistent  in  their
patterns of caring (Isabella, 1993), qualities which may enable secure dyads to estab-
lish more effective and satisfying collaborative interactions which persist into child-
hood. Moreover, we hypothesised that one cause of these security-related differences
is that mothers of securely attached children are more likely to treat their children as
individuals with minds, showing sensitivity to their current levels of understanding,
using mental state terms in their interaction with them, and so on. This propensity
has  been  labelled  ‘mind-mindedness’  (Meins,  1997b).  However,  since  our  data  on
mothers’ mind-mindedness were not collected until the children were three years of
age, we do not yet know whether this tendency was present in infancy. We should
also  be  cautious  in  proposing  any  causal  direction  between  these  measures:  a
mother’s mind-mindedness may be involved in the establishment of a secure attach-
ment  relationship;  conversely,  the  type  of  interactions  which  result  from  having  a
securely attached child may cause a mother to focus more on her child’s mental life.
That  said,  the  current  evidence  concerning  the  precursors  of  a  secure  attachment
relationship  (e.g.  Ainsworth  et  al.,  1971;  Isabella,  1993)  suggests  that  certain  early
patterns  of  interaction  may  be  causal.  Moreover,  we  would  suggest  that  such  pat-
terns  may  themselves  be  dependent  upon  mothers  representing  their  children  at  a
mental  level,  and  thus  interpreting  their  actions  with  reference  to  their  attendant
beliefs, desires and intentions. Clearly, further research into the relationship between
maternal  representations  of  children  in  infancy  and  subsequent  development  is
needed before this interesting question can be answered.

Perhaps we can be less tentative about the direction of causation between moth-
ers’  propensity  to  describe  their  children’s  mental  attributes  and  children’s  subse-
quent  performance  on  tasks  measuring  mentalising  ability.  Given  the  longitudinal
nature of our study, we know that this proclivity on the part of the mother was pre-

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

Attachment and Mentalising Abilities 21

sent  at  least  a  year  before  children  were  assessed  on  mentalising  tasks.  Assuming
that maternal mind-mindedness is more or less stable over the ﬁrst few years of life,
it  seems  that  focusing  on  one’s  child’s  mental  characteristics  over  this  period  may
make  an  important  contribution  to  the  child’s  developing  understanding  of  other
minds. This is not to say that early manifested differences in infant responsivity will
have  no  effect  on  the  quality  of  the  developing  attachment  relationship;  indeed,
much  more  research  is  needed  to  determine  the  importance  of  such  differences.
Further, as Main (1991) suggests, a secure attachment relationship may confer other
relevant beneﬁts, such as allowing children more ‘mental space’ to explore the men-
tal lives of others. In addition, it may be that mothers of securely attached children
are  more  sensitive  and  attuned  to  their  children  in  general,  and  that  their  greater
mind-mindedness might be accompanied by an enhanced attunement to the infant in
non-mental domains8.

Finally,  some  mention  should  be  made  of  the  reduction  in  the  strength  of  the
effect  of  security  of  attachment  by  the  time  children  have  reached  5  years  of  age.
Whilst  the  difference  between  the  secure  and  insecure  groups  on  the  unexpected
transfer task at age 4 was signiﬁcant, these differences were signiﬁcant on only one
of the measures (number of children producing maximum scores on the picture iden-
tiﬁcation task) at age 5. This reduction in effect strength is probably due in part to
the fact that these children will have started formal schooling, and will consequently
have had much greater opportunities to interact with other children. As children get
older, relationships beyond the boundaries of attachment ﬁgures and the family will
take on a more important role, and the relationship between child and primary care-
giver will become just one of many formative ties. This view is consistent with those
which stress the importance of social relationships and interactions within the con-
texts  of  the  immediate  family  (Dunn  et  al.,  1991),  extended  family  (Lewis  et  al.,
1996) and school (Lalonde & Chandler, 1995) for the child’s emerging understand-
ing of other minds.

In summary, we suggest that our ﬁndings add weight to the view that certain fea-
tures of early infant-caregiver relationships, particularly mothers’ tendency to inter-
act  with  their  infants  as  individuals  with  minds,  have  an  important  inﬂuence  on
children’s  development  of  symbolic  and  mentalising  abilities.  These  differences  are
manifested  in  children’s  ability  to  adopt  the  perspectives  of  an  experimenter  in
exploring non-veridical orientations to reality, and in their later performance on lab-
oratory  assessments  of  mentalising  abilities.  Further  research  is  required  to  deter-
mine  the  precise  signiﬁcance  of  maternal  mind-mindedness  in  the  establishment  of
the secure attachment relationship and the subsequent advantages shown by securely
attached children. For example, we need more data on whether the effects of attach-
ment security are direct or mediated by other variables. In the meantime, however,
we can suggest that by treating their children as individuals with minds, rather than
creatures with needs which must be fulﬁlled, mothers of securely attached children
can provide a ‘creative social mirror’ (Fonagy et al., 1994, p. 247), which allows their
children  to  develop  a  sense  of  themselves  as  sources  of  perspectives  on  the  world,
and thus ‘to think of [themselves] as thinkers’ (James, 1890, p. 296). Further investi-
gation of the correlates and consequences of the secure attachment relationship rep-
resents an exciting opportunity to increase our understanding of how social contexts
and cognitive endowments shape each other in early development.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

22 Elizabeth Meins et al.

References
Ainsworth,  M. D. S.  &  Wittig,  B. A.  (1969).  Attachment  and  exploratory  behaviour  of  one
year olds in a strange situation. In B.M. Foss (Ed.), Determinants of Infant Behaviour, Vol.
4. New York: Barnes and Noble.

Ainsworth,  M. D. S.,  Bell,  S. M.,  &  Stayton,  D. J.  (1971).  Individual  differences  in  Strange
Situation behaviour of one year olds. In H.R. Schaffer (Ed.), The origins of human social
relations. New York: Academic Press.

Ainsworth,  M. D. S.,  Blehar,  M. C.,  Waters,  E.,  &  Wall,  S.  (1978).  Patterns  of  attachment:

Assessed in the strange situation and at home. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Astington, J. W. (1996). What is theoretical about the child’s theory of mind? A Vygotskian
view of its development. In P. Carruthers & P.K. Smith (Eds.), Theories of theories of mind.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Baron-Cohen, S. (1995).  Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind. Cambridge,

MA: MIT Press.

Bee,  H. L.,  van  Egeren,  L. F.,  Pytkowicz  Streissguth,  A.,  Nyman,  B. A.,  &  Leckie,  M. S.
(1969).  Social  class  differences  in  maternal  teaching  strategies  and  speech  patterns.
Developmental Psychology, 1, 726–734.

Belsky, J. & Rovine, M. (1987). Temperament and attachment security in the strange situa-

tion: An empirical rapprochement. Child Development, 58, 787–795.

Belsky, J., Garduque, L., & Hrncir, E. (1984). Assessing performance, competence and execu-
tive  capacity  in  infant  play:  Relations  to  home  environment  and  security  of  attachment.
Developmental Psychology, 20, 406–417.

Bradley, D. R., Bradley, T. D., McGrath, S. G., & Cutcomb, S. D. (1979). Type I error rate
of the chi-square test of independence in R 3 C tables that have small expected frequencies.
Psychological Bulletin, 86, 1290–1297.

Bretherton, I., Bates, E., Benigni, L., Camaioni, L., & Volterra, V. (1979). Relationships between
cognition, communication and quality of attachment. In E. Bates, L. Benigni, I. Bretherton, L.
Camaioni, & V. Volterra (Eds.), The emergence of symbols. New York: Academic Press.

Camilli, G. & Hopkins, K. D. (1979). Testing for association in 2 3 2 contingency tables with

very small sample sizes. Psychological Bulletin, 86, 1011–1014.

Dunn,  J.,  Brown,  J.,  Slomkowski,  C.,  Tesla,  C.,  &  Youngblade,  L. M.  (1991).  Young  chil-
dren’s understanding of other people’s feelings and beliefs: Individual differences and their
antecedents. Child Development, 62, 1352–1366.

Dunn,  L. M.,  Dunn,  L. M.,  Whetton,  C.,  &  Pintilie,  D.  (1982).  Picture  Vocabulary  Scale.

Windsor, UK: NFER-Nelson.

Fernyhough,  C.  (1996).  The  dialogic  mind:  A  dialogic  approach  to  the  higher  mental  func-

tions. New Ideas in Psychology, 14, 47–62.

Fonagy,  P.,  Redfern,  S.,  &  Charman,  A.  (1997).  The  relationship  between  belief-desire  rea-
soning  and  a  projective  measure  of  attachment  security  (SAT).  British  Journal  of
Developmental Psychology, 15, 51–61.

Fonagy, P., Steele, M., Steele, H., Higgitt, A. C., & Target, M. (1994). The Emmanuel Miller
Memorial Lecture 1992: The theory and practice of resilience. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 35, 231–257.

George,  C.,  Kaplan,  N.,  &  Main,  M.  (1985).  The  Adult  Attachment  Interview. Unpublished

manuscript. University of California at Berkeley.

Harris,  P. L.  (1991).  The  work  of  the  imagination.  In  A.  Whiten  (Ed.),  Natural  theories  of
mind: Evolution, development  and  simulation  of  everyday  mindreading.  Oxford,  UK:  Basil
Blackwell.

Harris,  P. L.  (1992).  From  simulation  to  folk  psychology:  The  case  for  development.  Mind

and Language, 7, 120–144.

Harris, P. L., Johnson, C. L., Hutton, D., Andrews, G., & Cooke, T. (1989). Young children’s

theory of mind and emotion. Cognition and Emotion, 3, 379–400.

Hobson,  R. P.  (1993).  Autism  and  the  development  of  mind.  Hove:  Lawrence  Erlbaum

Associates.

Howell, D. C. (1992). Statistical methods for psychology. Belmont, CA: Duxbury Press.
Isabella,  R. A.  (1993).  Origins  of  attachment:  Maternal  interactive  behavior  across  the  ﬁrst

year. Child Development, 64, 605–621.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

Attachment and Mentalising Abilities 23

James, W. (1890). Principles of psychology. New York: Holt.
Jöreskog, K. G. & Sörbom, D. (1989). LISREL 7 User’s reference guide. Chicago: Scientiﬁc

Software Inc.

Klagsbrun, M. & Bowlby, J. (1976). Responses to separation from parents: A clinical test for

young children. British Journal of Projective Psychology and Personality Study, 21, 7–26.

Lalonde, C. E. & Chandler, M. J. (1995). False belief understanding goes to school: On the
social-emotional consequences of coming early or late to a ﬁrst theory of mind. Cognition
and Emotion, 9, 167–185.

Lamb, M. E., Hwang, C. P., Frodi, A., & Frodi, M. (1982). Security of mother- and father-
attachment  and  its  relation  to  sociability  with  strangers  in  traditional  and  nontraditional
Swedish families. Infant Behavior and Development, 5, 355–367.

Leslie,  A. M.  (1987).  Pretense  and  representation:  The  origins  of  ‘theory  of  mind’.

Psychological Review, 94, 412–426.

Leslie,  A. M.  (1991).  The  theory  of  mind  impairment  in  autism:  Evidence  for  a  modular
mechanism  of  development?  In  A.  Whiten  (ed.),  Natural  theories  of  mind.  Oxford:  Basil
Blackwell.

Lewis, C., Freeman, N. H., Kyriakidou, C., Maridaki-Kassotaki, K., & Berridge, D. (1996).
Social inﬂuences on false belief access: Speciﬁc sibling inﬂuences or general apprenticeship?
Child Development 67, 2930–2948.

Lewis,  V.  &  Boucher,  J.  (1988).  Spontaneous,  instructed  and  elicited  play  in  relatively  able

autistic children. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 6, 325–339.

Lillard,  A. S.  (1993).  Pretend  play  skills  and  the  child’s  theory  of  mind. Child  Development,

64, 348–371.

Main, M. (1991). Metacognitive knowledge, metacognitive monitoring, and singular (coher-
ent)  vs.  multiple  (incoherent)  model  of  attachment:  Findings  and  directions  for  future
research. In C.M. Parkes, J. Stevenson-Hinde, and P. Marris (Eds.), Attachment across the
life cycle. London: Routledge.

Main,  M.  &  Weston,  D. R.  (1982).  Avoidance  of  the  attachment  ﬁgure  in  infancy:
Descriptions and interpretations. In C.M. Parkes and J. Stevenson-Hinde (Eds.), The place
of attachment in human behavior. New York: Basic.

Matas, L., Arend, R. A., & Sroufe, L. A. (1978). Continuity of adaptation in the second year:
The relationship between quality of attachment and later competence. Child Development,
49, 547–56.

Meddis, R. (1984). Statistics using ranks: A uniﬁed approach. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Meins, E. (1992). The correlates and consequences of infant attachment behaviour. Unpublished

doctoral dissertation, University of Cambridge.

Meins, E. (1997a). Security of attachment and maternal tutoring strategies: Interaction within
the  zone  of  proximal  development.  British  Journal  of  Developmental  Psychology, 15,
129–144.

Meins,  E.  (1997b).  Security  of  attachment  and  the  social  development  of  cognition.  Hove:

Psychology Press.

Meins, E. & Russell, J. (1997). Security and symbolic play: The relation between security of
attachment and executive capacity. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 15, 63–76.
Mueller, C. W. & Parcel, T. L. (1981) Measures of socioeconomic status: Alternatives and rec-

ommendations. Child Development, 52, 13–30.

Perner, J. (1991). Understanding the representational mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Perner, J., Ruffman, T., & Leekam, S. R. (1994). Theory of mind is contagious: You catch it

from your sibs. Child Development, 65, 1228–1238.

Ruffman,  T.,  Perner,  J.,  Naito,  M.,  Parkin,  L.,  &  Clements,  W. A.  (1996).  Older  (but  not

younger) siblings facilitate belief understanding. Manuscript submitted for publication.

Slade, A. (1987). Quality of attachment and early symbolic play. Developmental Psychology,

23, 78–85.

Taylor, M., Cartwright, B. S., & Bowden, T. (1991). Perspective taking and theory of mind:
Do  children  predict  interpretive  diversity  as  a  function  of  differences  in  observers’  know-
ledge? Child Development, 62, 1334–1351.

van IJzendoorn, M. H., Dijkstra, J., & Bus, A. G. (1995). Attachment, intelligence, and lan-

guage: A meta-analysis. Social Development, 4, 115–128.

Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes (M.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

24 Elizabeth Meins et al.

Cole,  V.  John-Steiner,  S.  Scribner,  and  E.  Souberman,  Eds.),  Cambridge,  MA:  Harvard
University Press.

Wimmer, H. & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining func-
tion  of  wrong  beliefs  in  young  children’s  understanding  of  deception.  Cognition, 13,
103–128.

Wood, D. J. & Middleton, D. (1975). A study of assisted problem-solving. British Journal of

Psychology, 66, 181–191.

Wood, D. J., Bruner, J., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem-solving. Journal

of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 17, 89–100.

Wood, D. J., Wood, H., & Middleton, D. (1978). An experimental evaluation of four face-to-

face teaching strategies. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 1, 131–147.

Youngblade, L. M. & Dunn, J. (1995). Individual differences in young children’s pretend play
with mother and sibling: Links to relationships and understanding of other people’s feelings
and beliefs. Child Development, 66, 1472–1492.

Notes

1. The results of this study are published in full in Meins, E. and Russell, J. (1997).
2. In the studies reported here, security of attachment was treated as a dichotomous variable (secure
versus insecure), since the numbers of children in the three insecure categories were too small for statisti-
cal analysis. Group means for the avoidant, resistant and disorganised categories were comparable for all
of the measures reported here.

3. The ﬁrst author was formally trained in the strange situation coding procedure, and was deemed to
have  reached  the  required  level  of  competence.  The  second  coder  had  previous  experience  in  coding
strange situations, and had reached agreement with other experienced coders.

4. The results of the box construction study are published in full in Meins, E. (1997a).
5. This shrinkage of the sample from Study Two was due to the necessity of administering the unex-
pected transfer task at an age when individual differences in performance were most likely to show up.
Participants  were  thus  only  tested  if  they  were  within  two  months  of  their  fourth  birthday,  an  age  at
which ﬂoor and ceiling effects would be least likely to occur (Perner, 1991).

6. It might be argued that a better measure of mentalising ability would be obtained by asking the test
question ﬁrst, followed by the control questions. However, C. Lewis (unpublished data) has shown that
reversing the order of questions has no effect on children’s performance on this task. A further point of
debate concerns the use of the ‘knowledge’ question as a control. We propose that a genuine failure to
understand  the  representational  nature  of  mind,  as  opposed  to  a  failure  to  understand  informational
access, would require the subject to be aware that Charlie does not know where the chocolate is, while still
predicting his search behaviour on the basis of its actual location.

7. Meddis (1984), among others, has argued that the Fisher exact test is inappropriate when marginal
totals are not ﬁxed, and presents an alternative test for 2 3 2 contingency tables. The effect of security of
attachment was signiﬁcant on Meddis’ test, Z 5 2.28, p , .025, and on a standard x2 test, x2 (1, N 5 21)
5 5.45, p , .05. Despite the low sample size, the lack of skewness in the marginal totals means that the
results of the x2 test can be assumed to be valid (Bradley, Bradley, McGrath and Cutcomb, 1979; Camilli
and Hopkins, 1979; Howell, 1992).

8. We are grateful to an anonymous reviewer for making this interesting point.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1998

Social Development, 7, 1, 1998

