Social understanding and self-regulation
predict pre-schoolers’ sharing with friends
and disliked peers: A longitudinal study

International Journal of
Behavioral Development
2015, Vol. 39(1) 53–64
ª The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0165025414537923
ijbd.sagepub.com

Markus Paulus,1 Maria Licata,1 Susanne Kristen,1
Claudia Thoermer,1 Amanda Woodward,2 and Beate Sodian1

Abstract
This study examined longitudinal relations between early measures of prosocial action in infancy as well as cognitive and social-cognitive
abilities, and the sharing behaviour of preschool children. The results reveal relations between delay-of-gratification at 24 months and inhi-
bitory control at 30 months, and children’s sharing at 5 years. Moreover, the analyses showed specific relations between distress under-
standing at 24 months and preschool children’s sharing with friends, and a relation between goal encoding at 7 months and sharing with a
disliked other at 5 years. Yet, there were no relations between early measures of prosociality in infancy and preschool children’s sharing.
The results support the view that inhibitory control competencies and social-cognitive abilities play an important role in the early
development of prosocial action.

Keywords
infancy, infant cognition, moral reasoning, psychosocial development

Developmental science has recently experienced a growing interest
in the early development of prosocial behavior. Extending previous
research (e.g., Kienbaum, Volland, & Ulich, 2001; Rheingold, Hay, &
West, 1976; Zahn-Waxler, Radke-Yarrow, Wagner, & Chapman,
1992; Zahn-Waxler, Robinson, & Emde, 1992), a number of recent
studies have provided evidence that infants engage in a variety of pro-
social actions such as helping, comforting and sharing already in the
second year of life (Brownell, Iesue, Nichols, & Svetlova, 2012;
Brownell, Svetlova, & Nichols, 2009; Dunfield & Kuhlmeier,
2010; Ka¨rtner, Keller, & Chaudhary, 2009; Over & Carpenter,
2008; Paulus, Ku¨hn-Popp, Licata, Sodian, & Meinhardt, 2013;
Svetlova, Nichols, & Brownell, 2010; Vaish, Carpenter, & Toma-
sello, 2009; Warneken & Tomasello, 2006; for reviews see Eisen-
berg, Fabes, & Spinrad, 2006; Paulus & Moore, 2012).

For example, Warneken and Tomasello (2006) showed that
already 1.5-year-old children engage in instrumental helping. They
presented the infants with situations in which an adult needed help
to accomplish an action (e.g., putting clothes on a washing line) by
overcoming problems (e.g., a clothespin fell to the ground). The
results showed that infants readily provided help (e.g., handing over
the clothespin). Further cross-sectional studies suggested that chil-
dren’s prosocial behaviours become more differentiated and less
dependent on communicative cues with increasing age (e.g., Blake
& McAuliffe, 2011; Kenward & Dahl, 2011; Shaw & Olson, 2012;
Svetlova et al., 2010). It has, for example, been demonstrated that
3-year-old children will usually share equally with a peer after they
have collaborated with him to obtain resources (e.g., Hamann, War-
neken, Greenberg, & Tomasello, 2011). In addition, studies have
shown that children are less inclined to share when it is costly than
when it is not (Paulus, 2014b; Thompson, Barresi, & Moore, 1997),
and that altruistic (that is, costly) sharing is a later developmental
outcome than non-costly prosocial behavior (e.g., Svetlova et al.,
2010). Moreover, using sharing scenarios and dictator-games, it has
been shown that 4- to 5-, but not 3-year-old preschoolers are more

inclined to share with friends than with disliked peers (Moore,
2009; Paulus & Moore, 2013), and that school-aged children share
more with in-group members than with out-group members (Fehr,
Bernhard, & Rockenbach, 2008). This suggests that early sharing
behavior becomes more selective in the course of the preschool
years (cf. Hay & Cook, 2007).

From one theoretical point of view, it has been suggested that
perceiving other people’s distress first leads to self-distress by
means of affect sharing (e.g., Preston & de Waal, 2002). With the
increasing ability to differentiate between self and other, children
become able 1) to understand that their perceived self-distress is
caused by the other’s distress and 2) to transform their own negative
emotionality into constructive and solution-oriented behaviours
such as comforting the other (Moore, 2007; see also Hoffman,
2000). Thus, the capacity to regulate one’s own negative emotions
plays an important role in the development of prosocial behavior
(Decety & Svetlova, 2012). Accordingly, it has been suggested that
the capacity to act prosocially is related to low impulsivity and high
self-regulation capacities (Eisenberg & Fabes, 1998). Support for
these notions comes from a number of studies that pointed to the
impact of emotion-regulation capacities, in particular inhibitory
control and attentional control, on young children’s prosocial beha-
vior (e.g., Eisenberg et al., 1996; Hastings, Rubin, & DeRose, 2005;
Kestenbaum, Farber, & Sroufe, 1989; Kienbaum, 2001; Liew et al.,
2011; Spinrad & Stifter, 2006).

1 Ludwig-Maximilian-Universita¨t Mu¨nchen, Germany
2 University of Chicago, USA

Corresponding author:
Markus Paulus, Ludwig-Maximilian-Universita¨t Mu¨nchen, Leopoldstr. 13,
Munich, 80802, Germany.
Email: markus.paulus@lmu.de

54

International Journal of Behavioral Development 39(1)

Building on findings that empathic concern and prosocial beha-
vior increases with the ability to differentiate self from other, the-
ories have claimed relations between prosocial behavior, and
the abilities to take another person’s perspective and to understand
other’s intentionality (Decety & Svetlova, 2012; Eisenberg &
Eggum, 2009; Kagan, 1981; Moore, 2007). These theoretical con-
siderations have been supported by findings on the relation
between perspective taking as well as intention understanding and
prosocial behavior (e.g., Carlo, Knight, Eisenberg, & Rotenberg,
1991; Eisenberg, Zhou, & Koller, 2001; Garner, Jones, & Miner,
1994; Guroglu, van den Bos, & Crone, 2009; Killen, Mulvey,
Richardson, Jampol, & Woodward, 2011; Strayer & Roberts,
2004; but for different results see Astington & Jenkins, 1995;
Peterson, 1983; for a comprehensive review see Eisenberg et al.,
2006).

Yet, notwithstanding the insights gained by these cross-
sectional studies, less is known about the longitudinal relations
between measures of early prosocial action and prosocial behavior
at preschool age, and the developmental precursors of preschool
children’s prosocial actions. Longitudinal studies with older chil-
dren and adolescents have pointed to some consistency in chil-
dren’s prosocial dispositions and behaviors (e.g., Eisenberg,
Carlo, Murphy, & van Court, 1995; Eisenberg et al., 1987, 1999).
Evidence for a relation between early prosocial behavior and
school-aged children’s prosocial actions comes from studies by Knafo
and Plomin (2006a, 2006b). Knafo and Plomin (2006a) conducted a
longitudinal examination of genetic and environmental influences
on the development of prosocial behavior from 2 to 7 years of age.
Children’s prosocial behavior was assessed by means of parental
reports. The authors reported high correlations for 1-year lags of
assessment (that is, between 2 and 3 years, or between 4 and 5 years)
and some stability from 2 to 7 years of age (correlations ranging from
r ¼ .13 to r ¼ .21). Yet, the assessment of prosocial behaviours was
restricted to parents’ reports and it would be desirable to have more
evidence from direct measures of young children’s prosocial beha-
viour. Directly examining infants’ prosocial behaviour, Knafo and
colleagues (Knafo, Zahn-Waxler, van Hulle, Robinson, & Rhee,
2008) provided evidence that empathic concern towards mothers and
examiners simulating pain was a stable disposition between 14 and
36 months of age. Moreover, Hay and colleagues (Hay, Castle,
Davies, Demetrious, & Stimson, 1999) examined children’s sharing
behaviour towards a friend in three age cohorts of children at age
18, 24 and 30 months as well as 6 months later. The results were mixed
as they, on the one hand, pointed to some stability in the rate of sharing
on the group level across the ages, but on the other hand also provided
evidence for a decline of sharing behaviour in girls between 18 and
24 months of age, and a similar decline in sharing by boys between
30 and 36 months. Examining stability of individual differences, anal-
yses showed a modest, though not significant stability in sharing in the
two oldest age groups. Recently, Liew et al. (2011) investigated the
relation between 18- and 30-month-old infants’ physiological regula-
tions as well as fearfulness and their sympathetic reactions to others’
distress. The results showed that low fearfulness and the ability to cope
with arousing situations at 18 months predicted comforting behaviour
at 30 months, even when controlling for comforting at 18 months, sug-
gesting a predictive relation between early temperamental and self-
control abilities and the development of prosocial behaviour. Taken
together, the overall picture is rather mixed. The studies suggest some
stability in the early development of prosocial behaviour, but some-
times the effects are rather small or fail to reach conventional levels
of significance.

Given that previous studies have focused on stability, employ-
ing the same measure across ages, it would be interesting to exam-
ine in greater detail whether there is developmental stability
between the different tasks that have been applied to examine pro-
social behaviour at different ages, e.g. instrumental helping in
infancy (Warneken & Tomasello, 2006) and sharing in preschoo-
lers (Fehr et al., 2008; Moore, 2009). From a theoretical point of
view, such an examination not only would reveal whether the age-
typical forms of prosocial behaviour relate to each other; such an
investigation would also reveal whether all of these tasks are sub-
served by the same underlying prosocial motivation or whether
they may be subserved by different psychological processes (for
discussions see Decety & Svetlova, 2012; Hay, 2009; Paulus,
2014; Warneken & Tomasello, 2009).

In particular, recent

theoretical models of early prosocial
development have suggested that early forms of prosocial action
(that is, helping, sharing, comforting) are conceptually distinct.
For example, Dunfield and colleagues have pointed out that
these behaviours are based on different evaluations of the oth-
er’s
situation (Dunfield, Kuhlmeier, O’Connell, & Kelley,
2011; Dunfield & Kuhlmeier, 2013). Svetlova and colleagues
(2010) differentiated the variety of prosocial actions based on
the costs involved for the prospective helpee. Moreover, Paulus
(2014) suggested that, besides different evaluations and social-
cognitive abilities, also varied types of motivation might under-
lie the different forms of prosocial action: some could be based
on a sympathetic motivation to reduce the other’s pain, some
could be motivated by normative considerations, and others
could be motivated by a wish to socially interact with the other.
Yet, on the other hand, it has been argued that all prosocial
behaviours are subserved by the same psychological mechan-
isms (e.g., Hauser, 2006). Knowledge about longitudinal rela-
tions
be
informative for the recent theoretical debate on the psychologi-
cal mechanisms underlying early prosocial action.

behaviours would

between

different

prosocial

In conclusion, the reviewed literature showed that prosocial
behaviour becomes more differentiated in the course of the pre-
school period and provided some (limited) evidence that the ten-
dency to act prosocially is a stable disposition. Furthermore,
theories suggested an impact of self-control abilities and social
competencies on prosocial action. Building on these previous find-
ings and theoretical considerations, the aim of the present study was
threefold.

First, we wanted to investigate longitudinal relations between
early forms of prosocial action in infancy, such as instrumental
helping and comforting, and prosocial behaviour at preschool age
to examine whether there was developmental stability between the
tasks that have typically been applied in infancy and preschool
age. We hypothesized that, if the tasks tapped into the same under-
lying psychological process, we should find interrelations
between the tasks. Yet, if prosocial behaviour has qualitatively
distinct roots (Radke-Yarrow et al., 1976) and is conceptually dis-
tinct (e.g., Dunfield & Kuhlmeier, 2013; Paulus, 2014), we should
not find interrelations between children’s performances in these
tasks. That is, the current study aim at informing the debate
whether a single or a multiplicity of mechanisms subserves early
prosocial behaviour.

Second, given the theoretical claims and empirical findings
about the relation between early self-regulation as well as social-
cognitive abilities and prosocial behaviour, we assessed the predic-
tive relations between early forms of these competencies and

Paulus et al.

55

preschool children’s prosocial action. More concretely speaking,
based on theoretical considerations about relations between proso-
cial action and self-regulation (Eisenberg & Fabes, 1998) as well as
social understanding (Moore, 2007), we hypothesized that early
developments in these abilities would be predictive for later proso-
cial behaviour.

In addition, we were particularly interested whether children’s
increasingly differentiated prosocial behaviour as evident in their
recipient-dependent sharing with friends and disliked peers
(Moore, 2009; Paulus & Moore, 2013) as well as their sharing
in costly and non-costly situations (Svetlova et al., 2010; Thomp-
son et al., 1997) would be predicted by the same measures, or
whether different abilities and mechanisms support the emergence
of these different forms of sharing. On the one hand, one could
argue that the same psychological mechanisms support the devel-
opment of sharing in general, and that purely situational factors
subserve differentiated sharing in concrete situations (cf. Penner,
Dovidio, Piliavin, & Schroeder, 2005). Given that, for example,
all forms of costly sharing require an inhibition of the tendency
to keep all valuable resources for oneself, one could hypothesize
that sharing behaviour is predicted by young children’s develop-
ing self-control abilities—independent from whether they share
with a friend or a disliked peer.

Yet, on the other hand, it is possible that different psychological
processes might be involved in the emergence of differentiated pro-
social behaviour. Research has shown that interpersonal under-
standing between peers who dislike each other is considerably
lower than interpersonal understanding between friends (Kurdek
& Krile, 1982). At the same time, concurrent measures of social
understanding and prosocial actions in children and adolescents
demonstrated positive relations between an understanding of inten-
tionality and resource distribution decisions (e.g., Cassidy, Werner,
Rourke, Zubernis, & Balaraman, 2003; Guroglu et al., 2009; Killen
et al., 2011; Moore, Barresi, & Thompson, 1998). Based on these
findings, one could hypothesize that early precursors of social
understanding predict children’s sharing behaviour; and that—
given that interpersonal understanding is anyhow high between
friends—the relation between social understanding and sharing
might be particularly high for sharing with disliked others.

In addition, given the findings that preschoolers allocate more
resources to friends than to disliked others and even expect others
to do so (Moore, 2009; Olson & Spelke, 2008; Paulus & Moore,
2013), preschoolers may understand sharing with friends as norma-
tive. As a consequence, inferences about the friend’s intentionality
may not be necessary to make a distribution decision. In contrast, in
the case of other recipients the decision to share will depend on a
careful consideration of the others’ wants and needs. Thus, the rela-
tion between social understanding and sharing may be closer for
sharing with disliked peers than with friends.

Thus, as outcome variable at preschool age, we assessed chil-
dren’s sharing behaviour by adapting a task following Moore
(2009) and Fehr and colleagues (2008). In this task, children are
presented with either a friend or a disliked peer as potential shar-
ing partners. Furthermore, children are presented with different
trial types in which their sharing of resources with the other is
either costly for themselves or not. Given that this differentiation
between friends and disliked peers seems to emerge between 4 and
5 years of age, but not before (Paulus & Moore, 2013), we
assessed sharing at 5 years.

As early forms of prosocial behaviour, we assessed infants’
helping behaviour at 18 months in an instrumental helping

paradigm (Warneken & Tomasello, 2006), and their prosocial
responding at 24 months in a comforting task following Zahn-
Waxler and colleagues (1992). We decided to employ these mea-
sures at these (but not later) ages as they have often been concep-
tually replicated in the literature and provide some variation at
the respective age (e.g., Dunfield & Kuhlmeier, 2011; Paulus
et al., 2013; Young, Fox, & Zahn-Waxler, 1999), whereas ceiling
effects have been reported for some of these tasks at later ages
(Dunfield & Kuhlmeier, 2013).

In order to examine the impact of self-control abilities, we assessed
1) children’s ability to tolerate a delay of gratification (cf. Mischel,
Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989), building on a task by Kochanska and col-
leagues (Kochanska, Murray, Jacques, Koenig, & Vandegeest,
1996; see also Kochanska, Murray, & Harlan, 2000) that has been
successfully employed with toddlers and preschool children.
Furthermore, we assessed 2) children’s inhibitory control and
attentional control by means of parent’s reports on the Early Child-
hood Behavior Questionnaire (Putnam, Gartstein, & Rothbart,
2006). As theories have suggested relations between the under-
standing of other’s intentionality and perspective on the one hand,
and prosocial behavior on the other hand (Decety & Svetlova,
2012; Eisenberg & Eggum, 2009; Kagan, 1981; Moore, 2007),
we administered two further tasks. First, as an early measure of
social-cognitive development, we administered a looking-time
task on infants’ goal-encoding abilities following the design of
Woodward (1998, 1999). In this task, infants are presented with
an actor reaching and grasping one of two objects. In the test trials,
the position of both objects is switched. Infants are presented either
with the actor grasping the same object (at the novel position) or
following the old movement path (and hence grasping the other
object). Infants’ dishabituation (e.g., longer looking) to the trial
in which the actor grasps the novel object (compared to the grasping
of the same object in the habituation trials) is interpreted as evi-
dence for their encoding of the other’s action goal. It has been
argued that the ability to encode others’ goals is the earliest devel-
opmental precursor for an understanding of others as intentional
agents (Woodward, 2013). Supporting this claim studies have
provided evidence for a link between children’s ability to under-
stand others’ goals in infancy and their theory-of-mind compe-
tencies at preschool age (Aschersleben, Hofer, & Jovanovic,
2008; Wellman & Brandone, 2009; Wellman, Lopez-Duran,
LaBounty, & Hamilton, 2008; Wellman & Philips, 2001). Sec-
ond, we included a perspective-taking task following McGuigan
and Doherty (2002), who extended on a classical task by Flavell
and colleagues (Flavell, Shipstead, & Croft, 1978).

Finally, we included children’s gender as further variable as
some studies have pointed to an impact of gender (e.g., Birch &
Billman, 1986; but for different findings see, for example, Moore,
2009). It is important to control for children’s general cognitive
capacities to ensure that possible relations between the tasks are not
due to increased cognitive abilities. Thus, we included measures of
infants’ working memory and children’s verbal intelligence to con-
trol for the impact of domain-general cognitive abilities.

Method

Participants

The final sample for the outcome measure at 5 years of age, the
sharing task, consisted of 72 healthy children with a mean age of
60.8 months (SD ¼ 0.71; 35 girls) at the sixth appointment. Four

56

International Journal of Behavioral Development 39(1)

further children initially started, but did not complete, the longitu-
dinal study (e.g., due to having moved to another city). All those
children were also invited at earlier points in their development.
From these children who contributed data to the last measurement
point, data at
the following earlier measure points were also
obtained: At the first appointment, data from 65 children (mean
age ¼ 7.0 months, SD ¼ 0.26; 32 female) could be obtained in the
working memory task, and data from 34 children (mean age ¼ 7.0
months, SD ¼ 0.26; 21 female) could be obtained in the goal encod-
ing task.1 At the second appointment, data from 61 children (mean
age ¼ 18.1 months, SD ¼ 0.24; 31 female) could be obtained in the
instrumental helping task. At the third appointment, data from 62
children (mean age ¼ 24.0 months, SD ¼ 0.25; 32 female) could
be obtained in the empathy task. At the fourth appointment, data
from 58 children (mean age ¼ 29.9 months, SD ¼ 0.36; 29 female)
could be obtained in the Early Childhood Behavior Questionnaire
(ECBQ) and data from 64 children (mean age ¼ 30.1 months,
SD ¼ 0.36; 33 female) could be obtained in the perspective taking
task. At the fifth appointment, data from 50 children (mean age ¼
48.3 months, SD ¼ 0.25; 26 female) could be obtained in the intel-
ligence measure. Please note that the lower number of participants
in the earlier task is due to the fact that for some children, the tasks
were unusable at these time points due to experimenter errors,
equipment failure, or children’s unwillingness to participate in or
finish the respective task.

Children came from predominantly white middle-class families
in an urban area in Germany. They were part of a larger longitudinal
study on the development of theory-of-mind (e.g., Licata et al.,
2013; Thoermer, Sodian, Vuori, Perst, & Kristen, 2012). From the
72 mothers, 18 had attended 10 years of schooling (based on a non-
college-bound track in the German school system), 15 had a high-
school degree (13 years), 32 had a bachelor or master’s degree, and
7 had a PhD degree. Addresses were obtained through local birth
records. Families received a travel reimbursement and a small gift
for their participation.

Procedure

Measures

Goal encoding. At the first appointment (7 months), we assessed
infants’ goal-encoding abilities. Testing setup and procedure were
closely modelled following the infant-controlled habituation-
based procedure employed by Woodward (1998). Participants were
seated in a high chair in front of a puppet-stage opening. Infants
were first presented with a minimum of six and a maximum of
14 habituation trials, followed by six test trials (in order to maxi-
mize sample size, results will be reported only for the first pair of
test trials). In the habituation trials, a human hand and arm slowly
moved into the stage from the side and grasped one of the two avail-
able objects. The hand remained in this position until the infant had
looked away for two consecutive seconds. Subsequently, the cur-
tain closed. After 3 seconds, a novel habituation trial was adminis-
tered. In all habituation trials, the two possible target objects were at
the same position and the hand always grasped the same target.
When the looking times over three consecutive trials was less than
half the looking time of the first three trials (which had to sum up to
at least 12 seconds), habituation was terminated.

new location (preserving the goal object; new path trial) or to the
old location (preserving the movement path; new goal
trial).
Whether the test phase started with the new path or new goal trials
was balanced between participants. Two independent observers
who were blind towards the condition, coded the looking times off-
line from the videotapes.
Inter-rater reliability was r > .90
(cf. Woodward, 1998).

To assess whether the infants preferentially encoded the goal-
object of the actor’s reach and to allow for an investigation of
inter-individual differences, we first summed up the total looking
time for both events (new path trial, new goal trial) for every parti-
cipant. We then built an individual percentage score by dividing the
individual’s looking time to the new path trial by the total looking
time to both events, reflecting how much more time infants spent
looking at a change in target object (which would be indicative for
having encoded the goal of the other’s action).

Working memory. Furthermore, at the first appointment, infants’
working memory was assessed by a task modelled after Reznick,
Morrow, Goldman, and Snyder (2004). Infants sat on their care-
giver’s lap facing a frame with two openings. The openings were
side to side and 42 cm apart from centre to centre. To cover the win-
dows, two curtains were attached to the back of the frame. At the
beginning of each of the six trials, the experimenter (E) pulled aside
two curtains, put her face in one of the windows, and engaged the
infant’s attention. E then withdrew her face, replaced the two cur-
tains, and wiggled her fingers at the top centre of the frame. As soon
as the infant looked toward the fingers, E reopened the curtains, and
after a 2- to 3-s pause, she reappeared in her previous location. The
curtains were then closed again. After a short pause, E reopened the
curtains to initiate the next trial. E’s location of appearance was
counterbalanced between the left and right windows, and the proce-
dure lasted for six trials (for further description of the apparatus and
procedure, see Reznick et al., 2004).

To assess the direction of the infant’s first gaze in each trial after
the reopening of the curtain, a research assistant coded the video-
tapes in the following manner. A score of 1 was given if the infants
looked towards the cued direction, and a score of 0 was given if
infants’ looked towards another location. Participants’ scores were
averaged over the test trials. A second person coded a random sam-
ple of 25% children. Cohen’s Kappa was .72.

Instrumental helping. At the second appointment (18 months),
infants’ instrumental helping behaviour was assessed following a
procedure of Warneken and Tomasello (2006). The assessment
included two trials, an experimental trial and a control trial, which
were always administered in this order to keep the situation compa-
rable for all children. In both trials, the child was seated on a child-
sized chair at a small table. In the experimental trial, the experimen-
ter fixed a piece of cloth on a washing line and accidentally dropped
a clothespin on the floor. She tried to reach for it while looking at
the clothespin, but was not able to reach it. In the control trial, chil-
dren were presented with the experimenter sitting on the other side
of the table with a pen in front of her. The experimenter took the
pen, looked at it, and intentionally threw it away. Subsequently, she
looked in a bored fashion in the other direction, without paying any
attention to the pen. In both trials, infants were given 30 seconds to
respond.

For the test phase, the object locations were switched. First,
infants were familiarized with the novel display. Subsequently, the
test trials started. In the test trials the hand alternately reached to the

For each trial, a first experimenter coded from video recordings
whether the child showed helping behaviour or not. Helping beha-
viour was defined as returning the object (that is, clothespin, pen) to

Paulus et al.

57

the experimenter. To allow an analysis of inter-individual differ-
ences, a competence score was calculated following Paulus and col-
leagues (2013). Infants who helped in the experimental condition,
but not in the control condition (that is, where the adult deliberately
threw the pen away) were classified as competent. Infants who
showed no helping behaviour or infants who helped in the control
condition, were classified as not competent. Although infants who
helped in both conditions or just in the control condition returned
the object as well, we have no evidence to assume that the returning
of the object was based on a motivation to help as it (also) appeared
in a situation in which the adult clearly indicated no interest in the
respective object (that is, control condition). We therefore lumped
these conditions. A second rater coded 44% of the data. The inter-
rater agreement was 100%.

Empathic responding. At
the third appointment (24 months),
infants’ reactions towards a person in distress were assessed by
means of a procedure developed by Zahn-Waxler and colleagues
(1992). Mothers were instructed to pretend their finger to be
clamped in a clipboard and to simulate pain during a free play phase
of their child. In particular, they were asked to simulate enduring
pain for 30 seconds and decreasing pain for further 30 seconds.
Mothers were also instructed not to request help from their child
and not to directly look at him/her during the simulation. Infants’
reactions during the mothers’ simulation was assessed.

Infants’ behaviour was coded from recordings following the
scheme of Young and colleagues (Young, Fox, & Zahn-Waxler,
1999). We coded whether infants understood the distress of their
mother on a 5-point scale (1: no understanding; 2: nonverbal ges-
tures, e.g., pointing at the clipboard as cause of the pain; 3: verbal
expressions, questions; 4: verbal expression and nonverbal explora-
tion; 5: repeated verbal and nonverbal exploration). Furthermore,
we assessed infants’ prosocial behaviour on a 4-point scale (1: no
signs of worriedness; 2: little help; 3: moderate help for 3 5 sec-
onds; 4: repeated or enduring help for more than 5 seconds). Help
was defined as any behaviour that aimed to diminish the pain of the
other, such as blowing the finger, verbally offering help, or bringing
a band-aid. A second rater coded 34% of the data. Cohen’s Kappa
ranged from k ¼ .75 to k ¼ .92.

Gift delay. At the third appointment (24 months), infants’ behaviour
in a delay-of-gratification task was assessed adapting a procedure
after Kochanska and colleagues (1996). The experimenter told
the child that she has a gift for her in a bag. She shows the bag to
the child, yet not the content of the bag. Before handing over the
bag that contains the gift, she pretends to have forgotten the ribbon
to prepare the gift. She puts the bag on a table and asks the child to
not touch it until she is back. Subsequently she leaves the room for
3 minutes.

Children’s behaviour during the 3 minutes was coded from
video recordings on a 6-point scale (6: bag not touched; 5: bag
touched; 4: looked in bag; 3: hand in bag; 2: gift taken out of bag;
1: gift unwrapped). A second rater coded 30% of the data. The inter-
rater agreement was k ¼ .89.

Inhibitory control and attentional control. At the fourth appoint-
ment (30 months), the children’s caregiver (mostly the mother)
completed the respective subscales of the Early Childhood Beha-
vior Questionnaire (Putnam, Gartstein, & Rothbart, 2006) in order
to assess children’s inhibitory control and attentional control com-
petencies. This questionnaire contains items in a 7-point Likert-

scale format that asks them to report on the frequency of particular
behaviours in everyday situations. As parents’ answered all items,
we calculated a sum value indicating toddler’s inhibitory control
competencies and attentional control competencies.

#

Perspective-taking. At the fourth appointment (30 months), hiding
skill was assessed with a task adopted from Flavell and colleagues
(1978) as well as McGuigan and Doherty (2002). The task consisted
of two sub-tasks, first the hiding and then the judgement task.2
For the hiding task, experimenter and child sat at opposite sides
of a table. A cardboard screen (18 cm high  23 cm wide) with an
attached wooden base was placed between them and a teddy
(a 10 cm  5 cm  3 cm Pooh
toy teddy) was used as item. The
child was then asked by the experimenter to ‘‘put the teddy on the
table so that I don’t see him.’’ This was repeated four times, with
varying positions of the experimenter in relation to the child’s posi-
tion: sitting 180 opposite the child, 90 to the child’s right, 90 to
the child’s left, and then next to the child. For each trial, the child
was awarded one point for each trial in which the teddy was placed
so that the screen was between the experimenter and the teddy.
Thus the score for this perspective hiding task could range from
0 to 4. A random sample of 30% of the valid sample were coded
by a second coder blind to the judgement of the first coder, interra-
ter agreement was  ¼ .95.

The judgement was modelled after McGuigan and Doherty
(2002). Overall, children received 2 trials with 4 test questions.
On the first trial (180 trial), the experimenter (E) sat opposite of
the child at a narrow table. The same items as in the hiding task
were used. E put the cardboard screen broadside to herself, in such
a way that the bear was blocked from her view, but in clear sight of
the child. The child was asked: ‘‘Can I see the bear, now?’’ and
‘‘Can you see the bear, now?’’ Then, the experimenter put the card-
board screen broadside to the child, so that the bear was blocked
from the child’s view, but in clear sight of the experimenter. Again,
the child was asked the same questions.

Depending on the trial, to be correct, children had to either nod
or answer the question with ‘‘yes’’ or to shake their head or answer
the question with ‘‘no’’, respectively. Coding was done from
recordings. For each correct answer, children received a score of
1. For each incorrect answer children received a score of 0. Thus,
across the 2 trials, children could receive a maximum score of 4.
Due to experimenter error or lack of cooperation, not all children
received all trials. Consequently, only children who had received
and answered at least 3 out of 4 questions of each subtask were
included in the analyses and the percentage of correct answers of
both subtasks out of all valid questions was used as the dependent
variable. Approximately 30% of the sample were coded by a second
coder blind to the judgement of the first coder, which yielded 100%
interrater agreement.

Verbal IQ. At the fifth appointment (48 months), we administered
the subscales Comprehension and Similarities of the Wechsler Pre-
school and Primary Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI-III, Petermann,
2009, following Wechsler, 2002) to control for the impact of verbal
IQ on the sharing task. Children’s performances in the subscales
of the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence were
analysed following the scheme of Wechsler (2002) to estimate the
participants’ verbal IQ.

Sharing behaviour. At the sixth appointment (60 months), sharing
behaviour was assessed adapting a task by Fehr et al. (2008) and

58

International Journal of Behavioral Development 39(1)

Table 1. Descriptive results of the predictor variables.

Variable
Goal encoding (7 months; n ¼ 34)
Working memory (7 months; n ¼ 65)
Prosocial responding (24 months; n ¼ 62)
Distress understanding (24 months; n ¼ 62)
Gift delay (24 months; n ¼ 70)
Inhibitory control (30 months; n ¼ 58)
Attentional control (30 months; n ¼ 58)
Perspective-taking (30 months; n ¼ 64)
Verbal IQ (48 months; n ¼ 50)

Mean

59.5%
0.67
3.8
1.8
3.99
47.6
49.2
59%
107

SE

3.5
0.02
0.15
0.15
0.24
1.2
0.7
2.2
1.7

Note. The table shows the descriptive results for the predictor tasks. Goal encod-
ing could range from 0 to 100 and Working memory from 0 to 1. Empathic
responding was coded on a 4-point scale, Distress understanding on a 5-point
scale, and Gift delay on a 6-point scale. Possible scores for Inhibitory control and
Attentional control could range from 0 to 70. Perspective-taking ranged from 0
to 100.

Moore (2009). Children were prompted to think about the name of a
friend and a disliked peer (that is, somebody they did not like to
play with). Children were then asked to choose amongst a set of
puppets one that represents their friend and one that represented the
disliked peer. Each puppet was paired with a paper envelope. The
participant was told that the envelope would go to the child whose
was represented by the respective puppet. Additionally, the children
themselves received an envelope. Following Moore (2009), stickers
were used for the sharing task. The sharing task consisted of two
types of trials. In the prosocial trials, children could choose between
one sticker for themselves and no sticker for the other, or one
sticker for themselves and one sticker for the other (that is, sharing
without costs). In the sharing trials, children could choose between
two stickers for themselves and no sticker for the other, or one
sticker for themselves and one for the other (that is, sharing with
costs). Each trial type was administered with each sharing partner,
giving raise to a 2 (sharing partner: friend, disliked peer)  2 (trial
type: prosocial, sharing) design. Children were presented with three
blocks of trials, with each block containing all four possible trials.
Children’s choices in the sharing task were coded online by the
experimenter. For each trial, participants received a score of 0 if
they chose the inequitable (1,0) or (2,0) option and a score of 1 if
they chose the equitable (1,1) option. To assess interrater reliability,
26 randomly chosen children were recoded by a second person from
video recordings. Correlation analyses for the four measures were
between r ¼ .99 and r ¼ 1, showing an excellent agreement
between both raters.

Results

Descriptive results. Table 1 gives an overview on the descriptive
results for each task.

Goal encoding. To ensure that participants’ showed the expected
effect (that is, longer looking to a switch in the actor’s goal than the
movement path, indicating a preferential encoding of the other’s
action goal), a one-sample t test against chance level (50%) was
performed. It revealed that infants’ looking pattern was highly sig-
nificant, t(33) ¼ 2.681, p ¼ .01, replicating earlier findings (Wood-
ward, 1998).

Figure 1. Mean number of trials on which participants (n ¼ 72) choose the
equitable (1,1) option as a function of trial type (prosocial or sharing) and
recipient (i.e., friend or disliked peer). Note that the y-axis starts with 1
(item range: 0–3). Error bars indicate standard errors of the means.

Instrumental helping. Of the 61 infants, 24 received a score of 1 and
37 a score of 0. The number of infants showing competent helping
(around 40%) were comparable to Warneken and Tomasello (2006)
who reported 70% helping in the experimental trial of the clothe-
spin task and 25% helping in the control trial of the marker task
(ca. 45% difference).

Sharing behaviour. The results of the sharing task can be seen in
Figure 1. A repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted with the
factors Friendship (friend, disliked peer) and Trial Type (sharing,
prosocial). The analysis yielded a significant main effect of Friend-
ship, F(1, 71) ¼ 54.193, p < .001, 2 ¼ .43, showing that the chil-
dren were more inclined to share with their friends than the disliked
peers. Moreover, the analysis yielded a significant main effect of
Trial Type, indicating that the children shared more in the prosocial
trials than in the sharing trials, F(1, 71) ¼ 9.252, p < .005, 2 ¼ .12.
There was no effect of the interaction term, F < 1.

Given that the different trial types (i.e., sharing and prosocial)
for each sharing partner (friend, disliked peer) were highly corre-
lated (both rs ¼ .70, ps < .001), we decided to build a compound
measure for each partner by averaging the data across trial types.
This was justified by the fact that we were interested in examining
whether the variance in this task could be explained by variance in
the earlier measures and the fact that both trial types shared large
parts of their variance.

Relations between the predictors and the outcome measure. To
investigate our main research question, that is, the relation between
the early measures of prosocial behaviour as well as the early cor-
relates and children’s sharing, we conducted correlational analyses
employing Pearson’s coefficients. Missing data led to pairwise
deletion. The results of these analyses are presented in Table 2. Cor-
relational analysis revealed significant correlations between early
measures of social-cognitive competencies in infancy and toddler-
hood, and preschool children’s sharing. In particular, analyses
showed that self-control abilities (e.g., gift delay, inhibitory and
attentional control) were positively related to preschool children’s
sharing behaviour with friends and disliked peers. Furthermore, for
sharing with friends distress understanding was a predictor variable,

Paulus et al.

59

Table 2. Intercorrelations between the predictor and the outcome variables.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

1. Goal encoding (7 months)
2. Working memory (7 months)
3. Instrumental helping (18 months)
4. Distress understanding (24 months)
5. Prosocial behavior (24 months)
6. Gift delay (24 months)
7. Inhibitory control (30 months)
8. Attentional control (30 months)
9. Perspective-taking (30 months)

10. Verbal IQ (48 months)
11. Gender
12. Sharing friend (60 months)
13. Sharing disliked peer (60 months)

–
 .34*
 .09
 .16
.22
.08
.27
.06
 .1
.08
 .07
.07
.39*

–
.14
.10
.00
 .01
 .19
.16
 .10
 .16
.12
 .06
.03

–
 .24
 .04
 .01
 .26
 .09
.16
 .11
.32**
 .01
 .02

–
.19
.00
.19
.21
 .19
 .17
 .02
.29*
 .02

–
.00
.14
.02
 .12
.19
 .10
.15
.20

–
.10
 .07
.09
.04
 .20
.35**
.15

–
.13
.13
.01
 .21
.31*
.31*

–
 .03
 .10
 .13
.28*
.15

–
.14
 .25
 .12
 .16

–
.00
.09
.02

–
 .08
 .14

–

.35**

Note. The table shows the intercorrelations between the predictor variables (rows) and the target variables (columns). For each variable, the age of assessment and the
n’s for the zero point correlations are given in brackets. Two-tailed tests were employed to assess the significance of the correlations. ** p  .01; * p  .05.

whereas sharing with disliked peers was predicted by goal encoding
abilities.

It is possible that the relations between the social-cognitive vari-
ables (that is, goal encoding and distress understanding) and pre-
schoolers’ sharing were mediated by self-control abilities. Indeed,
research on the neurocognitive substrate of theory of mind has sug-
gested that inhibitory competencies play an important role in chil-
dren’s developing social understanding (e.g., Perner & Lang, 1999).
Thus, we further analysed whether the relations between the social-
cognitive competencies (that is, goal encoding, distress understand-
ing) were independent of more general self-control abilities (cf.
Wellman et al., 2008). Due to the small sample size of participants
for which we had data in all tasks (e.g., only 24 children remained
for whom we had data on the goal-encoding task, the inhibitory
control measure, and the sharing task), we were not able to conduct
regression analyses (cf. Draper & Smith, 1998). For this reason,
partial correlations—controlling for children’s self-regulation abil-
ities—were used instead of regression analyses.

More concretely speaking, we controlled for these measures of
self-control that in the previously reported correlational analyses
had shown significant interrelations with the sharing task, that is,
inhibitory control for sharing with friends, and inhibitory control,
attentional control, and gift delay for sharing with the disliked peer.
In other words, we calculated partial correlations between chil-
dren’s distress understanding and their sharing with friends, con-
trolling for
inhibitory control, and between
children’s goal encoding and their sharing with disliked peers, con-
trolling for the impact of inhibitory control, attentional control, and
gift delay.

the impact of

The partial correlation for distress understanding and sharing
with friend, controlling for the impact of gift delay, inhibitory
control, and attentional control, revealed a significant relation,
r(n ¼ 45) ¼ .31, p ¼ .03. The partial correlation for goal encoding
and sharing with the disliked peer, controlling for the impact of
inhibitory control, revealed a significant effect, r(n ¼ 24) ¼ .40,
p < .05.

Discussion

The present study examined the early development of prosocial
behaviour by means of a longitudinal investigation. In particular,

we examined the longitudinal relations between early measures
of prosocial behaviour—such as instrumental helping and comfort-
ing—as well as social-cognitive abilities in the first 2 years of life,
and sharing behaviour at 5 years of age. Results suggest that early
instances of prosocial behaviour do not relate to preschool chil-
dren’s sharing. Yet, they provide evidence that self-regulation com-
petencies and early social-cognitive abilities play an important role
in the development of sharing behaviour.

Overall, the study aimed at examining three interrelated ques-
tions. The first question was whether or not there are longitudinal
relations between early forms of prosocial behaviour present in
infancy (that is, instrumental helping, comforting) and later forms
of prosocial action such as sharing behaviour in the preschool age.
A second question concerned potential relations between early self-
regulation as well as social-cognitive abilities and preschool chil-
dren’s prosocial behaviour. Finally, given recent findings that pre-
schoolers’ prosocial behaviour is recipient-dependent (Moore,
2009; Paulus & Moore, 2013) and dependent on the costs related
to sharing (Svetlova et al., 2010), we were interested whether chil-
dren’s increasingly differentiated prosocial behaviour would be
predicted by the same measures. Let us consider each point turn
by turn.

First, we were interested in assessing developmental continuity
and discontinuity between early measures of prosocial behaviour
such as instrumental helping and later developing instances of pro-
social action such as differentiated sharing at preschool age. That is,
whereas previous longitudinal research on early prosocial develop-
ment has focused on developmental stability within one particular
measure (e.g., Hay et al., 1999; Knafo & Plomin, 2006a, 2006b),
we examined possible developmental interrelations between differ-
ent forms of prosocial behaviour. To avoid ceiling or floor effects,
we assessed each task at a suitable point in development, that is,
when they were first reliably shown and when there was sufficient
variation in children’s performance. Interestingly, we neither found
a relation between instrumental helping at 18 months and preschool
children’s sharing nor between prosocial behaviour in a comforting
task at 24 months and later sharing behaviour at 5 years. Whereas
previous cross-sectional studies indicated that there were no inter-
relations between the different instances of prosocial behaviour
(Dunfield et al., 2011; Dunfield & Kuhlmeier, 2013), the present
study is amongst the first to systematically examine longitudinal
relations between different measures of prosocial action in the first

60

International Journal of Behavioral Development 39(1)

years of life, indicating that the variety of prosocial actions do not
relate to each other.

How can we interpret these findings? On the one hand, one can
assume a common underlying prosocial motive, subserving chil-
dren’s behaviour in all prosocial tasks. Yet, given different task
demands, these measures do not relate to each other. However,
while we agree that the different task demands might decrease the
potential interrelations between tasks, we should still expect at least
some interrelations when we were to assume a common underlying
mechanism. We therefore suggest a second interpretation:
the
results could suggest that different social-cognitive mechanisms
might underlie different forms of prosocial actions. From a concep-
tual point of view, our findings thus provide longitudinal support
for recent proposals that the varieties of prosocial actions are based
on partly distinct mechanisms and follow their own developmental
pathways (e.g., Dunfield & Kuhlmeier, 2013; for a review, see Pau-
lus, 2014). Further research is needed to examine the developmen-
tal pathway of each prosocial action in greater detail.

A second aim of the current study was an assessment of the
social-cognitive and cognitive precursors of preschool children’s
sharing behaviour. Here, our study revealed significant relations
between domain-general self-control abilities as well as more spe-
cific social-cognitive abilities, and preschoolers’ inclination to
share with others. Relatively independent of the specific recipient,
toddlers’ self-control competencies were important predictors for
their later sharing behaviour. This is in line with findings and the-
oretical proposals that self-control plays an important role in the
development of social competence in general (e.g., Eisenberg
et al., 2009; Kochanska et al., 2000; Rubin, Burgess, Dwyer, &
Hastings, 2003; Steinbeis, Bernhardt, & Singer, 2012) and of pro-
social behaviour,
in particular (for a review, see Eisenberg,
2000). It suggests that an important psychological mechanism in the
development of sharing behaviour is the ability to inhibit one’s own
behavioural tendencies, e.g. to take all of the items for oneself.
These findings extent research on longitudinal relations between
early delay of gratification and inhibitory control (e.g., Eigsti
et al., 2006; Funder, Block, & Block, 1983; Shoda, Mischel, &
Peake, 1990) to the realm of sharing behavior in preschool children
by showing that already early interpersonal differences in self-
control at 2 years of age are predictive for sharing behavior at
5 years.

Yet, our study revealed no relation between the early develop-
ment of perspective-taking and preschool children’s prosocial
behaviour. This finding could be interpreted in two ways. On the
one hand, it corresponds to a few other studies that reported no rela-
tion between perspective-taking abilities and prosociality (e.g.,
Astington & Jenkins, 1995; Peterson, 1983),
indicating that
perspective-taking is not conceptually related to prosocial action
(but see Eisenberg et al., 2006, for a review on a considerable num-
ber of studies that reported relations between perspective-taking
and prosocial behaviour). Then, it is possible that by 5 years of age,
all children had reached the same level of perspective-taking and
that, consequently, early differences in this ability were not predic-
tive of later prosocial behaviour. Yet, this interpretation stands in
contrast to findings of concurrent relations between perspective-
taking and prosocial behaviour (cf. Eisenberg et al., 2006). On the
other hand, potential relations between perspective-taking and pro-
social behaviour could strongly depend on the specific aspect (of
the rather broad concept) of perspective-taking that is assessed in
the respective investigation. We assessed perspective-taking by
means of a task of McGuigan and Doherty (2002), which followed

the classical design of Flavell and colleagues (1978). This task
assessed spatial perspective-taking as it examined children’s eva-
luations of what others can see. In contrast, Eisenberg and col-
leagues (2001), for example, reported on a relation between
cognitive perspective-taking and prosocial behaviour. Our results
could thus indicate that cognitive, but not perceptual, perspective-
taking plays an important role in the development of prosocial
behaviour. It remains a task for future research to examine the dif-
ferent notions of perspective-taking and their relation to prosocial
behaviour in greater detail.

Our finding of specific relations between social-cognitive pre-
cursors and preschoolers’ sharing relates to our third question. In
particular, we were interested whether we were to find different
developmental precursors for sharing with different recipients. In
other words, we aimed at examining whether different psychologi-
cal processes related to the emergence of differentiated prosocial
behaviour.

Notably, the difference between sharing with friends vs. disliked
peers was quite substantial indicating that different processes might
subserve these decisions (that is, sharing with friends or disliked
peers), and that, as a consequence, the nature of the individual var-
iation that needs to be explained is also different. The present study
confirms previous studies, which also showed an effect of type of
recipient on preschool- and school-aged children’s sharing beha-
viour (Birch & Billman, 1986; Fehr et al., 2008; Moore, 2009;
Paulus & Moore, 2013), and relates to research showing that chil-
dren treat and reason about friends and non-friends differently
(e.g., Bigelow, 1977; Olson & Spelke, 2008; Slomkowski & Killen,
1992). However, whereas these previous studies have provided
compelling evidence that preschool (and older) children treat dif-
ferent recipients differently, the developmental pathway and the
precise underlying psychological mechanisms of this recipient-
dependent sharing behaviour have remained an open question.

One of the most interesting findings of our study was that chil-
dren’s inclination to share with the disliked peer was predicted by
their goal-encoding abilities. That is, 7-month-old infants’ perfor-
mance in the goal-encoding task following Woodward (1998) pre-
dicted their likelihood to share resources with the disliked peer at
5 years of age. Previous research had demonstrated that goal encod-
ing is an important precursor ability for young children’s develop-
ing concept of others as intentional agents with own beliefs and
desires (Aschersleben et al., 2008). Accordingly, our finding indi-
cates that early competences in encoding other’s goal-directed
behaviour support the emergence of prosocial behaviour. The pres-
ent study extents findings about concurrent relations between social
understanding and prosocial behaviour (e.g., Guroglu et al., 2009;
Moore et al., 1998) to very early childhood, by demonstrating that
individual differences as early as age 7 months are predictive for
later-developing prosocial behaviours.

Interestingly, such a relation was not found for sharing with the
friend. Yet, distress understanding selectively predicted sharing
with the friend, but not with the disliked peer. This finding further
supports the notion that partly different social-cognitive processes
might underlie prosocial behaviour directed towards friends and
towards disliked others. The relation between infants’ developing
ability to understand others’ distress (that is, cognitive empathy)
and their later sharing with friends could indicate that the better the
preschool children were in anticipating their friends becoming dis-
tressed when not being shared with, the more they shared. In other
words, their understanding of the friend’s potential distress led
them to be more generous, pointing to the impact of early

Paulus et al.

61

differences in cognitive empathy on the development of prosocial
behaviour.

From a process-developmental point of view, it is of high inter-
est to examine possible mediator effects. Given that we found inter-
relations between 5-year-old children’s sharing behaviour, and
distress understanding as well as goal encoding on the one hand,
and inhibitory control as well as delay-of-gratification on the other
hand, we investigated in greater detail whether children’s self-
control abilities were the common underlying capacities that sub-
served or mediated the developmental effect between distress
understanding as well as goal encoding and children’s sharing.
Given that distress understanding and goal encoding were indepen-
dently (of inhibitory control and delay-of-gratification) related to
sharing with friends and disliked peers, we can exclude that these
effects were subserved or mediated by children’s self-control abil-
ities. Rather, our data suggest a specific developmental pathway
between the social-cognitive precursor variables and preschool
children’s sharing behaviour.

that

This interpretation is further supported by the fact that we did
not find positive relations between measure of general cognitive
abilities,
is, working memory/information processing in
infancy and verbal IQ at the preschool age, and children’s sharing
behaviour. This suggests that our findings of positive relations
between early social-cognitive measures and preschool children’s
sharing cannot be reduced to general cognitive abilities. Rather, it
suggests that these links are specific for social-cognitive and self-
control abilities.

How should we then interpret the finding of a zero correlation
between goal encoding and sharing with the friend? On the one
hand, one could argue that this lack of correlation could be due
to the fact that different social partners were employed in the differ-
ent tasks (e.g., the mother in the distress task, a stranger in the help-
ing task, an unknown person in the goal-encoding task). This
variation in social partner could explain the differential associations
between distress understanding and sharing with friends, as both
were related to partners one has social relations to (that is, mother,
friend); as well as goal encoding and sharing with disliked peers, as
both relate to persons with which the child has no close relations. If
this interpretation were true, it would suggest that from its develop-
mental origins onwards, prosocial behaviour is quite partner-
specific and keeps this specificity to the preschool age. Yet, this
interpretation cannot account for all of our findings. For example,
also in the instrumental helping task a stranger served as social part-
ner. Nevertheless, there was no relation between goal encoding and
instrumental helping nor between sharing with disliked peer and
instrumental helping.

We thus suggest a second interpretation. Note that previous
interpersonal understanding between
research has shown that
friends is considerably higher than interpersonal understanding
between non-friends (Kurdek & Krile, 1982). We think that through
repeated interaction with friends, children were quite aware about
the friends’ subjective nature (that is, their individual preferences
and goals; Hughes & Dunn, 1998; Maguire & Dunn, 1997), so that
their general ability to reason about the others’ intentionality had no
impact on prosocial behaviour directed towards the friends (with
variance mainly explained by level of empathic concern). With dis-
liked peers, the tendency to share is low and, given generally lower
social understanding between non-friends, whether one shares at all
may depend on levels of social understanding (e.g., being aware, at
all, of the others’ goals). In other words, with friends, levels of
social understanding are high (Kurdek & Krile, 1982), and the

tendency to share is high anyway, with individual variation maybe
depending on degree of empathic concern. Assuming that early dif-
ferences in goal encoding predict later social-cognitive abilities
(e.g., Aschersleben et al., 2008), this could explain the relation
between goal encoding in infancy and sharing in preschool chil-
dren. It is also possible that the link between early goal encoding
and later sharing is not mediated through the development of social
understanding, but other social abilities or tendencies. For example,
it is possible that early social-cognitive abilities relate to quality of
peer interactions, enhancing children’s social experiences. As a
consequence of these experiences, children could become more
inclined to behave generously even towards disliked others. Further
research is thus needed to examine the nature of infants’ social-
cognitive abilities (for discussions see Uithol & Paulus, 2013;
Woodward, 2009) and, in particular, the specific developmental
pathway between early goal understanding and the development
of prosocial behaviour.

The present study thus joins recent findings on developmental
continuity within social cognition from the infant age to the pre-
school years (Wellman et al., 2008; Yamaguchi, Kuhlmeier,
Wynn, & vanMarle, 2009). It extends previous studies by demon-
strating for the first time a relation between tasks employed to
assess social cognition in infancy and later prosocial behaviour,
which was independent from general cognitive abilities such as
inhibitory control. Although the data demonstrate a longitudinal
relation between infant social cognition and preschool children’s
prosocial action, the precise neurocognitive mechanisms that sub-
serve this continuity in social-cognitive abilities need further
investigation.

While the present study informs current theorizing about the
early development of prosocial behaviour, it also has clear limita-
tions. Instead of examining developmental stability of one type of
prosocial behaviour across age, the current study assessed interrela-
tions between tasks that have usually been applied at different
points in development, such as simple instrumental helping at 18
months (Warneken & Tomasello, 2006), and recipient-dependent
resource allocation at 5 years (Moore, 2009). A more comprehen-
sive design, assessing the same tasks at the same time points, would
allow for an extended analysis of concurrent and longitudinal
relations.

Taken together, the current study provides longitudinal evidence
for an impact of early self-control and goal encoding abilities on
preschoolers’ sharing behaviour. Furthermore, it shows a relation
between distress understanding in the infant age and preschool chil-
dren’s prosociality, pointing thus to social-cognitive precursors of
early development of sharing behaviour.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Sabrina Krimmel, Stefanie Sabot, Kathrin
Perzylo, and the whole Babylab team for support in data acquisition
and coding as well as all families who participated in this study.

Conflict of interests

None declared.

Funding

The study was supported by a DFG grant So 213/27-1,2 to the last
author.

62

Notes

1. Although the drop-out rate for this task seems high, it is compa-
rable to other habituation-based studies with infants that
employed similar designs (e.g., Csibra, Gergely, Bı´ro´, Koo´s, &
Brockbank, 1999). To check whether this high rate was selective
with respect to our outcome measures, we performed independent-
samples t tests comparing the sharing rates of children for which
we had data points in the goal encoding task with the children for
which we had no data points. These tests revealed no significant
differences (all ps > .21). The same was true for the working
memory task (all ps > .16), the helping task (all ps > .12), the
measures of the comforting task (all ps > .81), the perspective-
taking task (all ps > .54), the ECBQ measures (all ps > .55), and
the IQ (all ps > .52).

2. Piloting showed that the ‘move screen’ task as employed by
Flavell et al. (1978) yielded performance at floor level. There-
fore it was replaced by the judgement task described here.

References

Aschersleben, G., Hofer, T., & Jovanovic, B. (2008). The link between
infant attention to goal directed action and later theory of mind abil-
ities. Developmental Science, 11, 862–868.

Astington, J. W., & Jenkins, J. M. (1995). Theory of mind development

and social understanding. Cognition and Emotion, 9, 151–165.

Bigelow, B. J. (1977). Children’s friendship expectations: A cognitive

developmental study. Child Development, 48, 246–253.

Birch, L. L., & Billman, J. (1986). Preschool children’s food shar-
ing with friends and acquaintances. Child Development, 57,
387–395.

Blake, P. R., & McAuliffe, K. (2011). ‘‘I had so much, it didn’t seem
fair’’: Eight-year-olds reject two forms of inequity. Cognition,
120, 215–224.

Brownell, C. A., Iesue, S. S., Nichols, S. R., & Svetlova, M. (2012).
Mine or yours? Development of sharing in toddlers in relation to
ownership understanding. Child Development, 84(3), 906–920.
doi:10.1111/cdev.12009

Brownell, C. A., Svetlova, M., & Nichols, S. (2009). To share or not to
share: When do toddlers respond to another’s needs? Infancy, 14,
117–130.

Carlo, G., Knight, G. P., Eisenberg, N., & Rotenberg, K. J. (1991). Cog-
nitive processes and prosocial behaviors among children: The role
of affective attributions and reconciliations. Developmental Psy-
chology, 27, 456–461.

Cassidy, K. W., Werner, R. S., Rourke, M., Zubernis, L. S., & Balara-
man, G. (2003). The relationship between psychological under-
standing and positive social behaviors. Social Development, 12,
198–221.

Csibra, G., Gergely, G., Bı´ro´, S., Koo´s, O., & Brockbank, M. (1999).
Goal attribution without agency cues: The perception of ‘‘pure rea-
son’’ in infancy. Cognition, 72, 237–267.

Decety, J., & Svetlova, M. (2012). Putting together phylogenetic and
ontogenetic perspectives on empathy. Developmental Cognitive
Neuroscience, 2, 1–24.

Draper, J., & Smith, H. (1998). Applied regression analyses. New York,

NY: Wiley.

International Journal of Behavioral Development 39(1)

Dunfield, K. A., & Kuhlmeier, V. A. (2013). Classifying prosocial
behaviour: Children’s responses to instrumental need, emotional
distress, and material desire. Child Development, 84, 1766–1776.

Eigsti, I. M., Zayas, V., Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., Ayduk, O., Dadlani, M.
B., . . . Casey, B. J. (2006). Predicting cognitive control from pre-
school to late adolescence and young adulthood. Psychological Sci-
ence, 17, 478–484.

Eisenberg, N. (2000). Emotion, regulation, and moral development.

Annual Review of Psychology, 51, 665–697.

Eisenberg, N., Carlo, G., Murphy, B., & van Court, P. (1995). Pro-
social development in late adolescence. Child Development, 66,
1179–1197.

Eisenberg, N., & Eggum, N. D. (2009). Empathic responding: Sympa-
thy and personal distress. In J. Decety & W. Ickes (Eds.), The social
neuroscience of empathy (pp. 71–83). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Eisenberg, N., & Fabes, R. (1998). Prosocial development. In N. Eisen-
berg & W. Damon, (Series Eds.), Handbook of child psychology:
(pp.
Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development
701–778). New York, NY: Wiley.

Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Karbon, M., Murphy, B. C., Wosinski, M.,
Polazzi, L., . . . Juhnke, C. (1996). The relations of children’s dispo-
sitional prosocial behavior to emotionality, regulation, and social
functioning. Child Development, 67, 974–992.

Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., & Spinrad, T. L. (2006). Prosocial devel-
opment. In W. Damon, R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.), & N. Eisenberg
(Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional,
and personality development (pp. 646–718). New York, NY: Wiley.
Eisenberg, N., Guthrie, I. K., Murphy, B. C., Shepard, S. A., Cumberland,
A., & Carlo, G. (1999). Consistency and development of prosocial dis-
positions: A longitudinal study. Child Development, 70, 1360–1372.
Eisenberg, N., Shell, R., Pasternack, J., Lennon, R., Beller, R., &
Mathy, R. M. (1987). Prosocial development in middle childhood:
A longitudinal study. Developmental Psychology, 24, 712–718.

Eisenberg, N., Valiente, C., Spinrad, T. L., Liew, J., Zhou, Q., Losoya,
S. H., . . . Cumberland, A. (2009). Longitudinal relations of chil-
dren’s effortful control, impulsivity, and negative emotionality to
their externalizing, internalizing, and co-orcurring behavior prob-
lems. Developmental Psychology, 45, 988–1008.

Eisenberg, N., Zhou, Q., & Koller, S. (2001). Brazilian adolescents’
prosocial moral judgment and behavior: Relations to sympathy, per-
spective taking, gender-role orientation, and demographic charac-
teristics. Child Development, 72, 518–534.

Fehr, E., Bernhard, H., & Rockenbach, B. (2008). Egalitarianism in

young children. Nature, 454, 1079–1084.

Flavell, J. H., Shipstead, S. G., & Croft, K. (1978). Young children’s
knowledge about visual perception: Hiding objects from others.
Child Development, 49, 1208–1211.

Funder, D. C., Block, J. H., & Block, J. (1983). Delay of gratification:
Some longitudinal personality correlates. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 44, 1198–1213.

Garner, P. W., Jones, D. C., & Miner, J. L. (1994). Social competence
among low-income preschoolers: Emotion socialization practices
and social cognitive correlates. Child Development, 65, 622–637.

Guroglu, B., van den Bos, W., & Crone, E. A. (2009). Fairness consid-
erations: Increasing understanding of intentionality in adolescence.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 104, 398–409.

Dunfield, K., Kuhlmeier, V. A., O’Connell, L., & Kelley, E. (2011).
Examining the diversity of prosocial behavior: Helping, sharing,
and comforting in infancy. Infancy, 16, 227–247.

Hamann, K., Warneken, F., Greenberg, J., & Tomasello, M. (2011).
Collaboration encourages equal sharing in children but not chim-
panzees. Nature, 476, 328–331.

Dunfield, K. A., & Kuhlmeier, V. A. (2010). Intention-mediated selec-

tive helping in infancy. Psychological Science, 21, 523–527.

Hastings, P. D., Rubin, K. H., & DeRose, L. M. (2005). The links
and the

inhibition, parental

between gender,

socialization,

Paulus et al.

63

developmental of prosocial behavior. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 51,
467–493.

ability to encode actions as goal-directed. Social Development,
23(2), 340–356. doi:10.1111/sode.12057

Hauser, M. (2006). Moral minds: How nature designed a universal

sense of right and wrong. New York, NY: HarperCollins.

Hay, D. F. (2009). The roots and branches of human altruism. British

Journal of Psychology, 100, 473–479.

Liew, J., Eisenberg, N., Spinrad, T. L., Eggum, N. D., Haugen, R. G.,
Kupfer, A., . . . Baham, M. E. (2011). Physiological regulation and
fearfulness as predictors of young children’s empathy-related reac-
tions. Social Development, 20, 111–134.

Hay, D. F., Castle, J., Davies, L., Demetrious, H., & Stimson, C. (1999).
Prosocial action in very early childhood. Journal of Child Psychol-
ogy and Psychiatry, 40, 905–916.

Maguire, M. C., & Dunn, J. (1997). Friendship in early childhood, and
social understanding. International Journal of Behavioral Develop-
ment, 21, 669–686.

Hay, D. F., & Cook, K. V. (2007). The transformation of prosocial
behavior from infancy to childhood. In C. A. Brownell & C. B.
Kopp (Eds.), Transitions in Early Socioemotional Development:
The Toddler Years (pp. 100–131). New York, NY: Guilford.

McGuigan, N., & Doherty, M. J. (2002). The relation between hiding
skill and judgment of eye-direction in preschool children. Develop-
mental Psychology, 38, 418–427.

Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). Delay of gratifica-

Hoffman, M. L. (2000). Empathy and moral development. Implications
for caring and justice. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Hughes, C., & Dunn, J. (1998). Understanding mind and emotion:
Longitudinal associations with mental-state talk between young
friends. Developmental Psychology, 34, 1026–1037.

tion in children. Science, 244, 933–938.

Moore, C. (2007). Understanding self and other in the second year. In
C. A. Brownell & C. B. Kopp (Eds.), Socioemotional development
in the toddler years: Transitions and transformations (pp. 43–65).
New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Kagan, J. (1981). The second year: Emergence of self-awareness. Cam-

Moore, C. (2009). Fairness in children’s resource allocation depends on

bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

the recipient. Psychological Science, 20, 944–948.

Ka¨rtner, J., Keller, H., & Chaudhary, N. (2009). Cognitive and social
influences on early prosocial behaviors in two sociocultural con-
texts. Developmental Psychology, 46, 905–914.

Moore, C., Barresi, J., & Thompson, C. (1998). The cognitive basis
of future-oriented prosocial behavior. Social Development, 7,
198–218.

Kenward, B., & Dahl, M. (2011). Preschoolers distribute scarce
resources according to the moral valence of recipients’ previous
actions. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1054–1064.

Kestenbaum, R., Farber, E. A., & Sroufe, L. A. (1989). Individual dif-
ferences in empathy among preschoolers: Relation to attachment
history. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development,
44, 51–64.

Kienbaum, J. (2001). The socialization of compassionate behavior by
child care teachers. Early Education and Development, 12,
139–153.

Kienbaum, J., Volland, C., & Ulich, D. (2001). Sympathy in the context
of mother–child and teacher–child relationships. International Jour-
nal of Behavioral Development, 25, 302–309.

Killen, M., Mulvey, K. L., Richardson, C., Jampol, N., & Woodward,
A. (2011). The accidental transgressor: Morally-relevant theory of
mind. Cognition, 119, 197–215.

Knafo, A., & Plomin, R. (2006a). Prosocial behavior from early to mid-
dle childhood: Genetic and environmental influences on stability
and change. Developmental Psychology, 42, 771–786.

Knafo, A., & Plomin, R. (2006b). Parental discipline and affection, and
children’s prosocial behavior: Genetic and environmental links.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 147–164.

Knafo, A., Zahn-Waxler, C., Van Hulle, C., Robinson, J., & Rhee, S. H.
(2008). The developmental origins of a disposition toward empathy:
Genetic and environmental contributions. Emotion, 8, 737–752.

Kochanska, G., Murray, K., Jacques, T. Y., Koenig, A. L., & Vandege-
est, K. A. (1996). Inhibitory control in young children and its role in
emerging internalization. Child Development, 67, 490–507.

Kochanska, G., Murray, K. T., & Harlan, E. (2000). Effortful control in
early childhood: Continuity and change, antecedents, and implica-
tions for social development. Developmental Psychology, 36,
220–232.

Kurdek, L. A., & Krile, D. (1982). A developmental analysis of the relation
between peer acceptance and both interpersonal understanding and per-
ceived social self-competence. Child Development, 53, 1485–1491.

Olson, K., & Spelke, E. S. (2008). Foundations of cooperation. Cogni-

tion, 108, 222–231.

Over, H., & Carpenter, M. (2008). Eighteen-month-old infants show
increased helping following priming with affiliation. Psychological
Science, 20, 1189–1193.

Paulus, M. (2014). The emergence of prosocial behavior: Why do
infants and toddlers help, comfort, and share? Child Development
Perspectives, 8(2), 77–81. doi:10.1111/cdep.12066

Paulus, M. (2014b). The early origins of human charity: Preschoolers
share more with poor than wealthy individuals. Frontiers in Psy-
chology, 5, 344. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00344

Paulus, M., Ku¨hn-Popp, N., Licata, M., Sodian, B., & Meinhardt, J.
(2013). Neural correlates of prosocial behavior in infancy: Different
neurophysiological mechanisms support the emergence of helping
and comforting. NeuroImage, 66, 522–530.

Paulus, M., & Moore, C. (2012). Producing and understanding proso-
cial actions in early childhood. Advances in Child Development and
Behavior, 42, 271–305.

Paulus, M., & Moore, C. (2013). The development of recipient-dependent
sharing behavior and sharing expectations in preschool children.
Developmental Psychology, 50(3), 914–921. doi:10.1037/a0034169

Penner, L. A., Dovidio, J. F., Piliavin, J. A., & Schroeder, D. A. (2005).
Prosocial behavior: Multilevel perspectives. Annual Review of Psy-
chology, 56, 365–392.

Perner, J., & Lang, B. (1999). Development of theory and mind and

executive control. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3, 337–344.

Peterson, L. (1983). Influence of age, task competence, and responsibil-
ity focus on children’s altruism. Developmental Psychology, 19,
141–148.

Preston, S. D., & de Waal, F. B. M. (2002). Empathy: Its ultimate and

proximate bases. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 25, 1–20.

Putnam, S. P., Gartstein, M. A., & Rothbart, M. K. (2006). Measure-
ment of fine-grained aspects of toddler temperament: The Early
Childhood Behavior Questionnaire. Infant Behavior & Develop-
ment, 29, 386–401.

Licata, M., Paulus, M., Thoermer, C., Kristen, S., Woodward, A., &
Sodian, B. (2013). Mother–infant-interaction quality and infants’

Radke-Yarrow, M., Zahn-Waxler, C., Barrett, D., Darby, J., King,
R., Pickett, M., & Smith, J. (1976). Dimensions and correlates

64

International Journal of Behavioral Development 39(1)

of prosocial behavior in young children. Child Development, 47,
118–125.

Psychological Research. Advance online publication.doi:10.
1007/s00426-013-0519-3

Reznick, J. S., Morrow, J. D., Goldman, B. D., & Snyder, J. (2004). The

onset of working memory in infants. Infancy, 6, 145–154.

Rheingold, H. L., Hay, D., & West, M. J. (1976). Sharing in the second

Vaish, A., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Sympathy through
affective perspective-taking and its relation to prosocial behavior in
toddlers. Developmental Psychology, 45, 534–543.

year of life. Child Development, 47, 1148–1158.

Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Altruistic helping in human

Rubin, K. H., Burgess, K. B., Dwyer, K. M., & Hastings, P. D. (2003).
Predicting preschoolers externalizing behavior from toddler tem-
perament, conflict, and maternal negativity. Developmental Psy-
chology, 39, 164–176.

Shaw, A., & Olson, K. R. (2012). Children disregard a source to avoid
inequity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141, 382–395.
Shoda, Y., Mischel, W., & Peake, P. K. (1990). Predicting adolescent
cognitive and self-regulatory competencies from preschool delay
of gratification: Identifying diagnostic conditions. Developmental
Psychology, 26, 978–986.

Slomkowski, C. L., & Killen, M. (1992). Young children’s conceptions
of transgressions with friends and nonfriends. International Journal
of Behavioral Development, 15, 247–258.

Spinrad, T. L., & Stifter, C. A. (2006). Toddlers’ empathy-related
responding to distress: Predictions from negative emotionality and
maternal behavior in infancy. Infancy, 10, 97–121.

Steinbeis, N., Bernhardt, B. C., & Singer, T. (2012). Impulse control
and underlying functions of the left DLPFC mediate age-related and
age-independent individual differences in strategic social behavior.
Neuron, 73, 1040–1051.

Strayer, J., & Roberts, W. (2004). Children’s anger, emotional expres-
siveness, and empathy: Relations with parents’ empathy, emotional
expressiveness, and parenting practices. Social Development, 13,
229–254.

Svetlova, M., Nichols, S., & Brownell, C. (2010). Toddlers’ prosocial
behavior: From instrumental to empathic to altruistic helping. Child
Development, 81, 1814–1827.

Thoermer, C., Sodian, B., Vuori, M., Perst, H., & Kristen, S. (2012).
Continuity from an implicit to an explicit understanding of false
belief from infancy to preschool age. British Journal of Develop-
mental Psychology, 30, 172–187.

infants and young chimpanzees. Science, 311, 1301–1303.

Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2009). The roots of human altruism.

British Journal of Psychology, 100, 455–471.

Wechsler, D. (2002). Wechsler preschool and primary scale of intelli-
gence – Third edition. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological
Corporation.

Wellman, H. M., & Brandone, A. C. (2009). Early intentional under-
standings that are common to primates predict children’s later the-
ory of mind. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 19, 57–62.

Wellman, H. M., Lopez-Duran, S., LaBounty, J., & Hamilton, B.
(2008). Infant attention to intentional action predicts preschool the-
ory of mind. Developmental Psychology, 44, 618–623.

Wellman, H. M., & Phillips, A. T. (2001). Developing intentional
understandings. In B. F. Malle (Ed.), Intentions and intentionality:
Foundations of social cognition (pp. 125–148). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Woodward, A. L. (1998). Infants selectively encode the goal object of

an actor’s reach. Cognition, 69, 1–34.

Woodward, A. L. (1999). Infants’ ability to distinguish between purpo-
seful and non-purposeful behaviors. Infant Behavior and Develop-
ment, 22, 145–160.

Woodward, A. L. (2013). Infant foundations of intentional understand-
ing. In M. R. Banaji & S. A. Gelman (Eds.). Navigating the social
world: A developmental perspective (pp. 75–80). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.

Yamaguchi, M., Kuhlmeier, V. A., Wynn, K., & vanMarle, K. (2009).
Continuity in social cognition from infancy to childhood. Develop-
mental Science, 12, 746–752.

Young, S., Fox, N. A., & Zahn-Waxler, C. (1999). The relations
between temperament and empathy in 2-year-olds. Developmental
Psychology, 35, 1189–1197

Thompson, C., Barresi, J., & Moore, C. (1997). The development of
future-oriented prudence and altruism in preschoolers. Cognitive
Development, 12, 199–212.

Zahn-Waxler, C., Radke-Yarrow, M., Wagner, E., & Chapman, M.
(1992). Development of concern for others. Developmental Psy-
chology, 28, 126–136.

Uithol, S., & Paulus, M. (2013). What do infants understand of oth-
ers’ action? A theoretical account on early social cognition.

Zahn-Waxler, C., Robinson, J., & Emde, R. N. (1992). The development

of empathy in twins. Developmental Psychology, 28, 1038–1047.

