Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology1984, Vol. 52, No. 1, 17-25Copyright 1984 by theAmerican Psychological Association, Inc.Social Isolation and Social Problem Solving:A Longitudinal StudyKenneth H. Rubin, Tina Daniels-Beirness, and Linda BreamUniversity of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, CanadaThe social problem-solving (SPS) abilities of children who were observed to interactinfrequently with their peers were investigated in two studies. In Study 1 the stabilityof isolate and social behavior in kindergarten and Grade 1 was examined. Therelations between the observed frequency of isolate and social play and SPS werecomputed. Isolate and social behaviors were found to be moderately stable fromkindergarten to Grade 1. Moreover, both quantitative and qualitative indexes ofSPS competence correlated (concurrently and predictively) in a negative directionwith the observed frequency of isolate play and in a positive direction with socialplay. In Study 2 the relations between frequency of isolate and social play andnaturalistic SPS skills were examined. The data revealed that nonassertive, compliantSPS strategies observed in kindergarten correlated concurrently, but moderately,with isolate play in kindergarten and predictively with isolate play in Grade 1.In recent years psychologists have designednumerous skills training curricula for young,socially withdrawn children (e.g., Furman,Rahe, & Hartup, 1979; Keller &Carlsen, 1974;and see Conger & Keane, 1981, for a review).The underlying rationale for the developmentof such curricula appears to be that nonsocialbehavior in early childhood is necessarily evil.Withdrawn children have been viewed as "atrisk" for peer rejection and the combinationof rejection and isolation has been found topredict pathological and dysfunctional behav-ior in adolescence and adulthood (Cowen,Pederson, Babigian, Izzo, & Trost, 1973; Roff,Sells, & Golden, 1972).Given these perspectives, it is not surprisingthat psychologists have suggested the provisionof amelioration programs for socially with-drawn children. Moreover, early interventionis viewed as doubly important because it hasPortions of this study were presented at the biennialmeeting of the Society for Research in Child Development,Detroit, 1983. The research reported herein was supportedby a grant from the Ontario Ministry of Community andSocial Services.We would like to thank Anne Emptage, Nancy Carlyle,and Karen Little for their help in data collection and coding.We also thank the teachers, principals, and children whohave made their valuable time available to us.Requests for reprints should be sent to Kenneth H.Rubin, Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo,Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 3G1.been suggested that the hypothesized negativereputations that young children garner as aresult of their isolate status becomes more dif-ficult to extinguish as they grow older.As we see it, however, there have been fewstudies of social isolation in childhood thatempirically justify these concerns. Rubin(1982; Rubin & Berwick, in press) has re-ported that socially withdrawn preschoolersand kindergartners display less cognitivelymature play patterns and that they are lessassertive than their more sociable age-mates;yet teachers do not rate these children as so-cially inept and peers do not reject young iso-late children. It may be, of course, that theeffects of social withdrawal in childhood arecumulative and if left untouched by advocatesof social-skills training, the hypothesized neg-ative consequences would surface. Moreover,the relation between isolation and social-skillsdeficits may be mediated by the relation ofboth behaviors to social-knowledge deficits. Assuch, in early childhood, playing alone (whichis actually very normal for preschoolers andkindergartners; Rubin, Fein, & Vandenberg,1983) may not have an immediate negativeimpact on a child's reputation with his or herpeers. Yet a high frequency of solitary activitywould preclude the possibility of experiencingthe role and rule negotiations and conflictsthat are purported to result in the growth ofsocial knowledge (Piaget, 1926; Sullivan,1718K. RUBIN, T. DANIELS-BEIRNESS, AND L. BREAM1953). In turn, the resultant social-cognitivedeficits may lead to increased social isolation,peer rejection, and behavioral maladjustment.One area of social knowledge that has re-ceived a good deal of attention recently andthat seems to be necessary for the initiationand maintenance of positive peer relationshipsis the ability to think about solutions to socialproblems (see Krasnor & Rubin, 1981, for arecent review). Clearly, the abilities to processsocial information; to understand the thoughts,feelings, and intentions of others; to consideralternative plans of action; to anticipate socialconsequences; and to evaluate outcomes canbe seen collectively as complex social-cognitiveskills that would have potentially far-reachingeffects on the development of normal peer re-lationships (Krasnor & Rubin, 1981; Spivack& Shure, 1974).Given speculation that peer interaction fa-cilitates the development of social cognition,it would appear appropriate to hypothesizethat observations of social withdrawal shouldcorrelate concurrently and negatively withmeasures of social problem solving. Further-more, the social-cognitive perspective previ-ously described leads to the hypothesis thatsocial withdrawal should predict social-think-ing deficits at later points in time.At present, little is known about the con-current and predictive correlational interplaybetween social withdrawal and social problemsolving in the early childhood years. In Study1 we traced the relations between nonsocialbehavior and social problem-solving skills bycomputing correlations between observed fre-quency of isolate and social play and quan-titative and qualitative indexes of hypothetical-reflective social problem-solving skills in thesame groups of children in kindergarten andGrade 1.In a second related study with the samegroup of children, we traced the relations be-tween observed isolate behavior and children'sabilities to solve social problems that occurduring naturalistic discourse. A number of re-searchers have shown that the correlations be-tween hypothetical-reflective and "real-life"social problem-solving skills range from non-significant to low (e.g., Krasnor & Rubin,1978; Sharp, 1981). Thus, we were interestedin discovering whether the two forms of as-sessment of social problem-solving skills cor-related differentially with sociability.Study 1MethodSubjectsThe subjects were drawn from a larger sample of kin-dergartners (n = 111) who were part of an initial studydesigned to develop an observational procedure to identifysocial isolates (Rubin, 1982). From this original sample,55 kindergarten children (28 males and 27 females, Mage = 5 years, 5 months) were administered a modifiedversion of Spivack and Shure's (1974) Preschool Inter-personal Problem-Solving (PIPS) test.One year later, 72 of the original sample of 111 kin-dergartners were available for observation and testing. Allof these children were administered the social problem-solving test. There were 36 males and 36 females (M age =6 years, 5 months). The children were English speakingand from lower-middle to middle-class socioeconomicbackgrounds. All children were of normal intelligence asassessed by the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test.Observational ProceduresEach child was observed indoors during free play (forkindergartners) or free activities period (for Grade 1 chil-dren) for six 10-s time samples per day over a 25-dayperiod. The observational procedures were taken directlyfrom Rubin (1982).To summarize the procedures briefly, behaviors werecoded on a checklist in which the cognitive play categoriesof functional (sensorimotor), constructive, and dramaticplay and games-with-rules (Smilansky, 1968) were nestedwithin the social participation categories of solitary, par-allel, and group (associative and cooperative) behaviors.Unoccupied and onlooker behaviors, reading or being readto, rough-and-tumble play, conversations with peers orteachers, and transitional (moving from activity to activity)behaviors were also coded.All categories were mutually exclusive. Thus, for ex-ample, if a child was being read to and during the obser-vation period he or she asked the reader a question, only"conversation" was coded.1The children's behaviors were recorded by four femaleobservers. Each observer was trained by using videotapesof children's free play and by observing children's play ina laboratory school not employed in the present study.Reliability was assessed by pairing each observer with everyother observer for a total of 30 min of coding. The numberof coding agreements divided by the number of agreementsplus disagreements exceeded 80% in each case. Interob-server agreement was also assessed by computing Kappa(Cohen, 1960), a statistic that corrects for chance agree-1 A coding manual is available from Kenneth H. Rubinupon request.SOCIAL ISOLATION19ment. For the observer pairings, Kappas ranged from .73to .87 (all significant at p < .01).For purposes of the correlational analyses all forms ofnonsocial, isolate behavior were combined. This categoryof isolate play consisted of the total of solitary-plus-un-occupied-plus-onlooker activity. In addition, all forms ofpeer interactive behavior were combined. Thus, social playconsisted of group behavior plus peer conversations.Hypothetical-reflective social problem solving. The So-cial Problem-Solving Test (SPST), a modification of Spi-vack and Shure's PIPS test, was administered individuallyto the children in kindergarten and in Grade 1.Unlike the PIPS, the SPST allows assessment of qual-itative as well as quantitative indexes of problem solving.Thus,'each child was told five stories concerning situationsin which one story character wanted to play with a toyor object in the possession of another. The child was askedwhat the story character could do or say to gain access tothe desired object. The characters in the stories variedwith regard to age (the story's protagonist was either thesame age or older than the "target") or sex (same-sex pro-tagonist and target or girl protagonist/boy target or boyprotagonist/girl target).The number of relevant alternatives the children pro-duced per story was tallied. Moreover, following each child'sinitial solution the experimenter probed for further re-sponses by asking, "If that didn't work what else mightX do or say so that she or he could have (play with) YT'A flexibility score was derived from the probed response.A score of 0 was coded if no further solution was offeredfollowing the probe; a 1 was scored if the same category(categories) was used in both the first and second responses;a 2 was accorded if the second attempt represented somemodification of the first response; and a 3 was coded ifthe second attempt differed completely from the first.The children's answers were coded qualitatively as well.The numbers of prosocial, agonistic, authority intervention,bribe/trade/finagle, and manipulation of affect strategieswere recorded (for specific examples see Rubin, 1982).The numbers of responses within each category were di-vided by the total number of alternatives offered by eachchild. The resultant computations represented the pro-portion of the total number of alternatives accounted forby each category.The protocols of 30 subjects were coded by two inde-pendent raters for the number of relevant alternatives andthe different strategy categories. Agreement was 100% forthe number of categories. The average percentage of agree-ment for the coding of different strategies was 92%.ResultsCorrelational AnalysesStability of isolate and sociable behavior.Isolate (ISO) and Sociable (SOC) behaviorsproduced by each child in kindergarten andGrade 1 (n = 72) were correlated as follows:ISO, r=.39, p<.00l; SOC, r=.41,p< .001.Concurrent correlations. In kindergarten,ISO was significantly and negatively correlatedwith the number of relevant categories pro-duced on the SPST (r = -.32, p < .009) andwith the social problem-solving flexibility (r =—.23, p < .05). Moreover, ISO was correlatedpositively with the proportion of adult inter-vention strategies suggested as appropriate forsolving social problems (r = .29, p < .01). Thefrequency of SOC play produced in kinder-garten was correlated positively with the num-ber of relevant solutions (;• = .22, p < .05). Atrend was evinced between SOC play and flex-ibility (r = .18, p < .10).In Grade 1, ISO correlated positively withthe proportion of agonistic strategies (r = .21,p < .04). On the other hand, the frequency ofSOC play in Grade 1 correlated positively withthe proportion of prosocial strategies (r = .23,p < .03) and negatively with the proportionof agonistic strategies (r = —.20, p < .05). Anegative trend was evinced between SOC playand the proportion of adult intervention strat-egies (r - —. 17, p < .075). No other concurrentcorrelations were significant.Predictive correlations. Kindergarten ISOwas negatively correlated with the number ofrelevant solutions (r = —.26, p < .02) andflexibility (r = -.23, p < .02) in Grade 1. Theproportion of adult intervention strategies waspredicted positively by kindergarten ISO (r =.21, p < .03).Grade 1 ISO was correlated significantly andnegatively with the number of relevant cate-gories (r = -.32, p < .009), flexibility (r =-.23, p < .04), and the proportion of agonisticalternatives suggested in kindergarten (r =-.26, p < .03). The proportion of adult in-tervention strategies produced in kindergartencorrelated positively with Grade 1 ISO (r =.22, p < .05).Finally, Grade 1 SOC play was predictedby the number of relevant alternatives (r =.27, p < .02) and by flexibility (r = .34, p <.005) in kindergarten.DiscussionThe purpose of Study 1 was to examine thestability of isolate and sociable behavior inearly childhood and to discover the concurrentand predictive social problem-solving corre-lates of these behaviors.Isolate and sociable behavior was found tobe only moderately stable from kindergarten20K. RUBIN, T. DANIELS-BEIRNESS, AND L. BREAMto Grade 1. There are numerous potential ex-planations for these findings. For one, the con-texts in which the behaviors were observedwere quite different. In kindergarten, the ma-jority of the school day consisted of free playactivities. Children's activities were not con-strained by tutorial curricular concerns. InGrade 1, however, the teachers set up a "freeactivities" period of Vi hour/day in an effortto accommodate to our observational needs.This meant that the children were given a freechoice of educationally relevant activities pro-vided by the teachers; many of these activitiesactually pulled for nonsocial, sedentary, con-structive enterprise. For example, there weremore puzzle-type activities and fewer oppor-tunities for sociodramatic play in the Grade1 class than in the kindergarten. Given theseecological differences the lack of strong sta-bility correlations is not surprising.Developmental factors may also have playedroles in determining the moderate stability ofisolate and sociable behavior. During earlychildhood, nonsocial activity more closely ap-proximates the norm for free play than doessocial activity (see Hartup, 1983; Rubin, Fein,& Vandenberg, 1983, for relevant reviews). InGrade 1, nonsocial behavior decreases andthereafter becomes increasingly non-norma-tive. The lack of high-stability correlations forisolate and sociable behaviors might thus re-flect rapid developmental changes from indi-vidual preference for normally egocentered,nonsocial activity in early childhood to socio-centered, reciprocal interchanges during mid-dle childhood; in short the phenomenon ofsociability may be in a state of flux during theperiod of childhood studied in this report.The significant concurrent correlations be-tween isolate and social behaviors and the so-cial problem-solving variables were likewise inthe low-to-moderate range. Kindergarten chil-dren who engaged in high frequencies of isolatebehavior produced fewer relevant solutions tohypothetical social problems than did theirmore sociable counterparts. These findingssupport an earlier report by Spivack and Shure(1974) in which teacher ratings of social with-drawal correlated negatively with quantitativeindexes of hypothetical social problem-solvingskill. We found, further, that kindergartenchildren who displayed high frequencies ofisolate behavior were more likely to perseverein using or to continue suggesting the originalstrategy when informed by the interviewer thatthis strategy might not work. Highly sociablechildren produced more relevant solutions tothe social problems than did their age-mateswho were observed to engage in a lower fre-quency of sociable play. Both the ability toproduce multiple solutions to social problems(Spivack & Shure, 1974) and the ability to beflexible when confronted with a social problem(Ladd&Oden, 1979; Krasnor& Rubin, 1981)have been considered indexes of social com-petence in childhood.It is interesting that these significant con-current correlations for the quantitative as-pects of hypothetical-reflective reasoning didnot hold for the Grade 1 children. As such,the results are suggestive of developmental dif-ferences in the link between peer interactionexperiences and the ability to solve socialproblems that involve object acquisition. Inkindergarten and preschool there appears tobe a wider variance than in Grade 1 concerningthe degree to which children are able to pro-duce multiple solutions to the hypothetical so-cial problems studied herein (Rubin & Kras-nor, in press). Ceiling appears to be reachedby Grade 1. Thus, given the restricted rangeof responses, it is not surprising that quanti-tative measures of object acquisition skills donot concurrently correlate equally with ob-served peer interaction in kindergarten andGrade 1.At the qualitative level, isolate behavior inkindergarten was correlated positively withsuggesting that adults intervene on the part ofthe problem-solving protagonist. This findingmirrors that found earlier by Rubin (1982)concerning the social problem-solving corre-lates of isolate behavior in preschoolers. Isolatebehavior in Grade 1 was correlated positivelywith the production of agonistic social prob-lem-solving strategies, and a negative trendwas evinced between sociable play and theproportion of adult intervention strategies.Taken together these data suggest that isolatebehavior in kindergarten and Grade 1 is ac-companied, albeit to a small degree, by somesocial-cognitive liabilities. Moreover, with age,the liabilities may actually increase. Thus, inkindergarten, withdrawn children appear torely predominantly on adults to solve theirsocial problems; in Grade 1, withdrawn chil-SOCIAL ISOLATION21dren or children who do not play often withtheir peers are reliant on both agonistic andadult intervention solutions, neither of whichis likely to endear them to their peers. Indeed,such solutions have been found to correlatepositively with sociometric measures of peerrejection (Rubin & Daniels-Beirness, 1983)and with teacher ratings of social maladjust-ment (Rubin & Clark, 1983) in early child-hood.It is interesting that isolate play in kinder-garten was predictive of both quantitative andqualitative indexes of social problem-solvingskill in Grade 1. Despite problems of rangerestriction in Grade 1, isolate play in kinder-garten negatively predicted the number of rel-evant and flexible solutions. Moreover, isolateplay was positively predictive of adult inter-vention strategies in Grade 1.The complexity of the social-cognition/so-ciability relationship is broadened somewhatby the findings that social problem-solvingabilities in kindergarten were predictive of iso-late and social play in Grade 1. Children whoemployed agonistic strategies in kindergartenwere less likely to play alone in Grade 1,whereas those who used adult interventionstrategies in kindergarten were more likely tobe observed in isolate activity in Grade 1. Fur-thermore, the number of relevant and flexiblesolutions produced in kindergarten negativelypredicted Grade 1 isolation and positively pre-dicted Grade 1 sociability. In short, kinder-gartners who were less assertive and had lesssocial-cognitive competence were found todisplay a higher frequency of nonsocial activityin Grade 1 than their more assertive and com-petent age-mates.Taken together, the predictive correlationssuggest an interesting interactive explanationfor the development of sociability and socialcognition in childhood. It seems that both fac-tors feed into each other and that the relationbetween the two is one of bilateral reciprocityrather than unilateral causality. Thus, earlyisolate behavior may negate the opportunityfor children to interact with each other, therebyinhibiting social-cognitive development. So-cial-cognitive deficits may, in turn, discouragechildren's peers from interacting with themand thus may lead to peer rejection and in-voluntary social isolation or withdrawal. Al-though this interactive model seems to be in-tuitively sound, we should add that the rela-tions between hypothetical-reflective reasoningand sociability by no means accounts for avery large proportion of the equational vari-ance. One factor that must be added to anymodel of social competence is the child's abil-ity to solve his or her problems as they occurin the natural setting. Most assuredly, chil-dren's relationships with their peers are de-termined not only by how they think aboutsocial issues but also by how they act in socialsettings. Thus in Study 2 we examined therelations between sociability and children'snaturalistic social problem-solving skills.Study 2As in many other studies of social problemsolving we were concerned with only one hy-pothetical problem in Study 1—object ac-quisition. Moreover, the strategies were solic-ited by an adult during an interview. It seemsto us that this interview format is somewhatrestricted. For example, it does not allow theinvestigator to discover the types of socialproblems that children actually face duringnaturalistic peer encounters. Nor does the hy-pothetical-reflective interview allow the ex-amination of actual success and failure ratesand strategic flexibility. As a result we decidedto focus on a general, easily identifiable typeof social problem that occurs during natu-ralistic discourse. Simply put, we investigatedhow it was that children who varied with re-gard to the frequency of observed isolate andsocial play in the classroom went about tryingto get others to do what they wanted them to(Levin & Rubin, 1983). More specifically, weexamined the relations between the types ofsocial problems, the discursive strategies usedto solve the types of social problems, and theoutcomes of these strategies in a free play dyadand children's observed frequencies of isolateand social play in the classroom. The problemsthat we examined included getting a desiredobject from another, gaining listener attention,stopping the action of another, soliciting ac-tivity from another, and attempting to get theplay partner to engage in a joint play activity.The particular coding frame used in ouranalyses was drawn from the sociolinguisticliterature on children's requests (e.g., Garvey,1975; Levin & Rubin, 1983). A request may22K. RUBIN, T. DANIELS-BEIRNESS, AND L. BREAMbe defined as any socially directed verbal at-tempt to gain listener compliance. Of course,verbal requests may be uttered in distinct fash-ions. For example, direct requests are producedas imperatives ("Give me the blue crayon.").Indirect requests may be uttered as questionimperatives ("Can you give me the bluecrayon?"), declaratives ("You could give methe blue crayon."), or as inferred requests ("Itsure would be nice to have that blue crayon.").The implication in all cases is that the speakerwants the blue crayon from the listener.In Study 2 we were interested in the fol-lowing questions: (a) Do kindergarten childrenwho engage in a high frequency of isolate ac-tivity in the classroom produce fewer requestsin a dyad than their more sociable counter-parts? A positive answer to this question wouldprovide us with some generalization data re-garding social isolation (i.e., socially directedbehaviors occur less often in dyadic interactionfor children who engage in a high frequencyof isolate play in the classroom), (b) Do kin-dergarten children who engage in a high fre-quency of isolate activity produce less assertiverequests (more indirect requests) than theirmore sociable counterparts? Do they producerequests that are less "costly" in terms of timeand effort than their more sociable age-mates?(c) Does the observed frequency of isolate playin kindergarten predict requestive compliance?Given that isolate activity may carry with ita peer reputation of nonassertiveness, it maywell be that children who engage in a highfrequency of such activity are less likely tohave their requests complied with, (d) Doesthe observed frequency of isolate play in kin-dergarten predict how children will deal witha request that has not been complied with? Ifisolate children are less mature and assertivethan their more sociable age-mates (Rubin,1982; Rubin & Berwick, in press), it may bethat such children give up or follow their playpartners' suggestions upon requestive failure.Sociable children, alternately, may exhibitgreater strategic flexibility (e.g., by modifyingthe original request), (e) Finally, we were in-terested in discovering whether requestive be-haviors in kindergarten were, in any way, pre-dictive of isolate and sociable activity in Grade1. Unfortunately, naturalistic social problem-solving data were available only for the kin-dergarten children. Thus concurrent corre-lations between isolate and social behavior andnaturalistic problem solving could be com-puted only for kindergarten.MethodSubjectsFifty-two kindergartners who took part in Study 1 wererandomly selected to participate in Study 2. There were28 boys and 24 girls, each paired in a free play dyad witha same-sex age-mate.Only 37 of the children (21 boys, 16 girls) observed indyadic interaction in kindergarten were available for class-room observation in Grade 1.ProcedureChildren were paired with a familiar age-mate for 15min on two separate occasions. A sociometric interviewthat was given the children as part of the larger study fromwhich these data are taken (see Rubin, Daniels-Beirness,& Hayvren, 1982, for an overview of this study) was usedto determine dyadic pairings. Only pairs of mutually rated"like a little" (as opposed to "like a lot" or "don't like")children formed the dyads.The children were brought to the playroom by a femaleresearch assistant who informed them that they could playas they wished for a few minutes. The research assistantthen left the playroom to "do some work." All activityand conversation was recorded subsequently on videotape.Each 15-min session was transcribed and coded as fol-lows. First, each verbalization was transcribed. The unitof verbal coding was the utterance or "that unit of speechseparated from the following unit by a logical break inspeech, a change in topic, and/or a one-second pause"(Rubin, 1979).Requests were coded as direct or indirect. Once coded,their consequences were coded as: (a) success—the partnerperforms the requested action; (b) query—the partner asksfor a clarification of the speaker's request (e.g., "Huh?""Wha'?"); (c) acknowledgment—the partner acknowledgesthe request but does not perform the requested action; (d)refusal—the partner refuses to comply with the request;(e) no response—the partner does not perform the re-quested action and makes no indication that he or sheheard the request; (f) total failures—categories (c) +(d) + (e).If a request failed, the first re-request strategy followingfailure was coded. A rigid strategy consisted of either averbatim repetition of the original request or a minormodification. A modified strategy involved either a state-ment of the original request with an addition or a switchfrom indirect to direct speech forms, or vice versa. Strat-egies such as requests for clarification of the partner's re-sponse ("Why?"), self-solutions involving the speaker'sperformance of his or her own requested act, no furtherresponse changes of subject involving the speaker's alter-ation of the topic of conversation, andfollows the partner'schange of subject were all coded as well.The speaker's social problem-solving goal was also codedfrom the videotapes and request transcripts. Goals includedthe following: (a) eliciting action—requesting that thepartner do something, (b) stopping the partner's activity,(c) object acquisition, (d) gaining listener attention, and(e) joint action—requesting the partner to join the self inactivity.SOCIAL ISOLATION23Reliability was computed by having two observers in-dependently code the videotaped and transcribed data.Eight full transcripts were coded. Percentages of agreementfor identifying requests, for coding requests as direct orindirect, for coding outcome, and for classifying follow-up to failure were 79%, 90%, 88%, and 85%, respectively.ResultsObserved isolate and sociable play in kin-dergarten and Grade 1 were correlated withthe frequency of all observed naturalisticproblem-solving behaviors in kindergarten.Concurrent CorrelationsIsolate play in kindergarten (n = 52) wasnegatively correlated with (a) the number ofutterances (r = -.45, p < .001), (b) the numberof direct requests (r = —.46, p < .001), (c) thenumber of indirect requests (r = -.27, p <.03), and (d) the total number of requests (r =-.39, p < .002).A trend indicating a positive relation be-tween isolate behavior and receiving a refusalto a request was found (r = .21, p < .07).Thirty-seven of the kindergartners experi-enced failure following their initial requests.For these children, observed isolate play inkindergarten correlated significantly with theproportion of follow-up strategies that involved(a) changing the subject (r = .35, p < .05) and(b) following the suggestion of the play partner(r = .32, p < .05).The goals of the protagonist (the problemsolver) were correlated with the incidence ofisolate activity in kindergarten. The propor-tions of strategies that involved attempting tostop the play partner from doing somethingand that involved joint action were negativelycorrelated with isolate behavior (r = —.25, p <.05, and r = -.30, p < .02, respectively).Observed sociable play in kindergarten waspositively correlated with (a) the number ofutterances (r= .45, p < .001), (b) the numberof direct requests (r = .42, p < .001), (c) thenumber of indirect requests (r = A1, p < .001),and (d) the total number of requests (r = .46,p < .001).In general there were no significant corre-lations between observed sociable play andsuccess or failure rate. No strategies followingfailure correlated significantly with sociableplay. There was only one significant findingconcerning the goals of the social problemsolver. The proportion of social problems thatinvolved attempts to get the target to join theprotagonist in play was significantly correlatedwith observed sociable behavior (r = .29,p < .02).Predictive CorrelationsIsolate play in Grade 1 was negatively cor-related with the number of utterances in kin-dergarten (r = —.35, p < .02). A trend indicateda negative correlation with the total numberof kindergarten requests (r = -.22, p < .10).It is interesting that a positive correlationbetween not waiting for the play partner torespond following the issuance of a requestand isolate behavior in Grade 1 was evinced(r = .53, p < .001). Moreover, after experi-encing request failure in kindergarten, thosewho were more likely to follow their partner'salternative suggestions (r = .34, p < .04) en-gaged in a higher frequency of observed isolateactivity in Grade 1.Isolate behavior in Grade 1 was predictednegatively by the proportion of strategies thatinvolved eliciting action (r = -.29, p < .05)and positively by the proportion of strategiesthat involved getting the play partner's atten-tion (r = .33, p < .003).DiscussionThe purpose of Study 2 was to examine therelation between the observed frequency ofisolate and sociable play in the kindergartenclassroom and indexes of naturalistic socialproblem-solving behavior in a dyadic situation.Specifically, we were interested in the types ofdiscursive strategies used to solve naturallyoccurring social problems.From the outset, our results indicate a clearand consistent relationship between sociableand isolate behavior exhibited in an adult su-pervised classroom and the production of so-cially directed behaviors in a free play dyaddevoid of adults. Children who engaged in ahigh frequency of classroom isolate play inkindergarten were also those who producedfewer utterances and requests during dyadicpeer interaction. Sociable children, alternately,produced a greater number of utterances andrequests during dyadic interaction. Conse-quently, it would appear as if isolate and so-ciable behavior is generalizable across settings.Although the data base is correlational in24K. RUBIN, T. DANIELS-BEIRNESS, AND L. BREAMnature, one may begin to speculate why it isthat some children display high frequencies ofisolate behavior. For one, it may be that thesechildren lack the social skills or the confidenceto initiate peer interaction. Children who dis-played a high frequency of isolate behaviorseemed to refrain from requesting that othersjoin them or that they join others in play. Iso-late behavior also seems related to a non-assertive, nonconfrontational "style" of socialinteraction. This nonassertive style may mirrorthe low-dominance status of isolate or with-drawn children. Support for the lack of as-sertiveness and low-dominance status stemsfrom our findings of the low frequency of re-quest behaviors by children who are observedto engage in a high frequency of nonsocialactivity. Requests, by definition, are verbal-izations produced to change the social part-ner's behaviors; they are socially assertive acts.Further evidence for low assertiveness anddominance status emanates from our findingsof a trend for isolate behavior to relate posi-tively with the receipt of a refusal to a request.Thus, it may be tentatively inferred that socialovertures of isolate children are more likelyto be rebuked in a dyadic situation with afamiliar peer.Isolate play was also positively correlatedwith changing the subject of the initial requestor following the listener's suggestions for al-ternative courses of action after failing to gaininitial request compliance. Again, these be-haviors are indicative of a passive, noncon-frontational style of interaction. Finally, isolatebehavior was negatively related with attemptsto stop the play partner's activity. Clearly thegoal of stopping another's activity involves di-rect confrontation, which isolate children ap-pear to avoid. Taken together these results arequite consistent with recent research indicatingthat isolate children or children perceived bytheir peers as shy or withdrawn (e.g., Coie &Kupersmidt, in press; Dodge, in press; Rubin& Borwick, in press) are less assertive andmore compliant than their more sociable peers.The results are also consistent with those ofStudy 1 in which the major qualitative indexthat distinguished between those kindergart-ners who played alone versus those who playedwith others was the suggestion that adults in-tervene during object conflict disputes. Againthe reliance on an adult to solve a social prob-lem precludes direct confrontation with peers.The results allow the inference that someindexes of naturalistic social problem-solvingability in kindergarten moderately predict iso-late behavior in Grade 1. Specifically, childrenwho were less socially oriented (i.e., those whoproduced few utterances and requests) in kin-dergarten tended to engage in more nonsocialactivity in Grade 1. These nonsocial childrenin Grade 1 were also more likely in kinder-garten to solve their social problems them-selves (by not waiting for their partners to re-spond to their request) and were more likelyto follow their partners' leads when their ownrequests were rebuffed. In addition, childrenwho produced a high frequency of nonsocialplay in Grade 1 set different social goals forthemselves than did their more sociable age-mates in kindergarten. Withdrawn children inGrade 1 were more likely to attempt to gettheir partner's attention and less likely to tryto elicit action on the part of their playmates.In short, their social goals involved less "cost"to their play partners, and yet they were notmore successful at gaining compliance to theirlesser cost requests. These predictive corre-lational results are in keeping with the picturethat withdrawn children are less assertive andmore compliant (following partners' sugges-tions) than their more sociable counterparts.General DiscussionIn summary, the results of Studies 1 and 2indicate that the relations between socialproblem-solving cognitions and behaviors andearly childhood sociability are, at best, mod-erate. The picture that emerges from these twostudies and from the surprisingly few otherstudies concerning the correlates of socialwithdrawal in early childhood is as follows:Isolate behavior is accompanied by a nonas-sertive and, to some extent, a cognitively lim-ited social problem-solving repertoire. Isolatebehavior is correlated further with the observedfrequency of cognitively immature and in-appropriate play (Rubin, 1982). Whether thecombination of these factors results in long-term negative consequences in social devel-opment is currently unknown. Perhaps socialproblem-solving deficits might become evidentwith continuous status as an isolate child.Thus, the correlates of extremely withdrawnbehavior in kindergarten or Grade 1 may bereflected by the correlational patterns de-SOCIAL ISOLATION25scribed herein. However, extreme isolate statusmaintained throughout the early years ofchildhood may predict and, to some extentcause, more serious social-cognitive deficits.Finally, we would like to provide some ad-vice to those who are considering the long-term study of social withdrawal in childhood.It seems to us that a critical factor that hasnot been examined in the literature concerningthe correlates of isolate behavior in childhoodis affect. Our data and the data of Rubin andBerwick (in press) portray the isolate child assomewhat nonassertive and nonconfronta-tional when in group settings. Furthermore,the isolate child produces fewer social prob-lem-solving strategies to hypothetical dilem-mas being posed by an adult interviewer. Bothof these findings may be attributable to feelingsof anxiety and/or low self-efficacy in socialsituations such as those examined herein. Inthe long run it may well be that the strongestconcurrent and predictive correlate of socialisolation is affect rather than cognition or socialcognition. Until further longitudinal data aregathered, however, our conclusion remainspurely speculative.ReferencesCohen, J. A. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominalscales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 20,37-46.Coie, J. D., & Kupersmidt, J. B. (in press). A behavioralanalysis of emerging social status in boys' groups. ChildDevelopment.Conger, J. C, & Keane, A. P. (1981). Social skills inter-vention in the treatment of isolated or withdrawn chil-dren. Psychological Bulletin, 90, 478-495.Cowen, E. L., Pederson, A., Babigian, H., Izzo, L. D., &Trost, M. A. (1973). Long-term follow-up of early de-tected vulnerable children. Journal of Consulting andClinical Psychology, 41, 438-446.Dodge, K. (in press). Behavioral antecedents of peer socialstatus. Child Development.Furman, W., Rahe, D. R, & Hartup, W. W. (1979). Re-habilitation of socially-withdrawn preschool childrenthrough mixed-age and same-age socialization. ChildDevelopment, 50, 915-922.Garvey, C. (1975). Requests and responses in children'sspeech. Journal of Child Language, 2, 41-63.Hartup, W. W. (1983). The peer system. In E. M. Heth-erington (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Social-ization, personality and social development (pp. 103-196). New York: Wiley.Keller, M. E, & Carlsen, P. M. (1974). The use of symbolicmodeling to promote social skills in preschool childrenwith low levels of social responsiveness. Child Devel-opment, 45, 912-919.Krasnor, L. R., & Rubin, K. H. (1978, June). Preschoolers'verbal and behavioural solutions to social problems. Pa-per presented at the annual meeting of the CanadianPsychological Association, Ottawa.Krasnor, L. R., & Rubin, K. H. (1981). The assessmentof social problem-solving skills in young children. InT. Merluzzi, C. Glass, & M. Genest (Eds.), Cognitiveassessment (pp. 452-476). New \brk: Guilford Press.Ladd, G., & Oden, S. (1979). The relationship betweenpeer acceptance and children's ideas about helpfulness.Child Development, 50, 402-408.Levin, E., & Rubin, K. H. (1983). Getting others to dowhat you want them to do: The development of chil-dren's requestive strategies. In K. Nelson (Ed.), Chil-dren's language (Vol. 4, pp. 157-186). New York: Gard-ner.Piaget, J. (1926). The language and thought of the child.London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.Rolf, M., Sells, S. B., & Golden, M. M. (1972). Socialadjustment and personality development in children.Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.Rubin, K. H. (1979). The impact of the natural settingon private speech. In G. Zivin (Ed.), The developmentof self-regulation through private speech (pp. 265-294).New York: Wiley.Rubin, K. H. (1982). Social and social-cognitive devel-opmental characteristics of young isolate, normal andsociable children. In K. H. Rubin & H. S. Ross (Eds.),Peer relationships and social skills in childhood (pp.353-374). New York: Springer.Rubin, K. H., & Borwick, D. (in press). The communi-cation skills of children who vary with regard to soci-ability. In H. E. Sypher & J. L. Applegate (Eds.), Socialcognition and communication. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.Rubin, K. H., & Clark, M. L. (1983). Preschool teachers'ratings of behavioral problems: Behavioral, sociometric,and social-cognitive correlates. Journal of AbnormalChild Psychology, 11, 273-286.Rubin, K. H., & Daniels-Beirness, T. (1983). Concurrentand predictive correlates of sociometric status in kin-dergarten and grade one children. Merrill-Palmer Quar-terly, 29, 337-351.Rubin, K. H., Daniels-Beirness, T, & Hayvren, M. (1982).Social and social-cognitive correlates of sociometric sta-tus in preschool and kindergarten children. CanadianJournal of Behavioural Science, 14, 338-348.Rubin, K. H., Fein, G. G., & Vandenberg, B. (1983). Play.In E. M. Hetherington (Ed.), Handbook of child psy-chology: Socialization, personality and social develop-ment (pp. 693-774). New York, Wiley.Rubin, K. H., & Krasnor, L. R. (in press). The developmentof social problem-solving skills in children. Journal ofApplied Developmental Psychology.Sharp, K. C. (1981). Impact of interpersonal problem-solving training of preschoolers' social competency.Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 2, 129-143.Smilansky, S. (1968). The effects of sododramatic play ondisadvantaged preschool children. New York: Wiley.Spivack, G., & Shure, M. G. (1974). Social adjustmentin young children. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psy-chiatry. New \brk: Norton.Received March 7, 1983Revision received August 29, 1983