545

British Journal of Developmental Psychology (2002), 20, 545–564
2002 The British Psychological Society

www.bps.org.uk

Theory of mind and peer acceptance in preschool
children

Virginia Slaughter*, Michelle J. Dennis and Michelle Pritchard
School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia

Two studies tested the hypothesis that preschool children’s theory of mind ability is
related to their levels of peer acceptance. In Study 1, 78 children between the ages of 4
and 6 provided peer nominations that allowed determination of social preference and
social impact scores, and classification in one of five peer status groups (following Coie
& Dodge, 1983). Children were also tested on five different theory of mind tasks. The
results showed that theory of mind scores were significantly related to social
preference scores in a subsample of children who were over 5 years old. Further,
popular children were found to score higher on theory of mind tasks than children
classified as rejected. Study 2 replicated and extended the first study with a new sample
of 87 4- to 6-year-old children. Study 2 included measures of peer acceptance, theory
of mind ability and verbal
intelligence, as well as teacher ratings of prosocial and
aggressive behaviours. The results of Study 2 showed that for the total group of
children, prosocial behaviour was the best predictor of social preference scores. When
the Study 2 sample was split into older and younger children, theory of mind ability was
found to be the best predictor of social preference scores for the older children (over
age 5), while aggressive and prosocial behaviours were the best predictors of peer
acceptance in the younger children. Overall, the pattern of results suggests that the
impact of theory of mind ability on peer acceptance is modest but increases with
children’s age.

Between the ages of 3 and 5, young children acquire a theory of mind, that is, the ability
to predict and explain the behaviour and feelings of others based on reference to
mental states like beliefs, desire and percepts (Astington, 1993; Wellman, 1990). There
are individual differences in theory of mind development, and recent work has shown
that those individual differences are related to a variety of social and cognitive factors.
For instance, theory of mind ability is related to the production of pretend play (Taylor
& Carlson, 1997), levels of school adjustment (Dunn, 1995), social competence and

* Requests for reprints should be addressed to Virginia Slaughter, School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Brisbane
4072, Australia (e-mail: vps@psy.uq.eds.au).

Virginia Slaughter et al.

546
social roles in school (Lalonde & Chandler, 1995; Sutton, Smith, & Swettenham, 1999),
and family variables such as mother–child interaction styles (Dunn, 1994; Peterson &
Slaughter, 2002; Ruffman, Perner, & Parkin, 1999) and number of siblings (Jenkins &
Astington, 1996; Ruffman, Perner, Naito, Parkin, & Clements, 1998).

The research to date suggests that individual differences in theory of mind ability
bear some relation to individual children’s social experiences. The purpose of the
present studies is to investigate whether theory of mind ability relates to children’s
levels of peer acceptance. Peer acceptance refers to the extent to which children are
accepted or rejected by their peer group. Since the acquisition of a theory of mind
reflects children’s understanding of other people’s mental states and emotional
responses, and is related to perspective-taking and empathy (Flavell & Miller, 1998), it is
hypothesized that individual children’s theory of mind ability will be related to their
levels of peer acceptance. This hypothesized relation could come about through two
reciprocal pathways. First, children who are relatively advanced on measures of theory
of mind ability may be relatively popular, as their theory of mind skills may enable them
to recognize and appreciate the desires, perspectives, emotions and thoughts of their
peers, and this level of interpersonal sensitivity might lead to a child’s being relatively
well liked within his or her peer group. Second, it is hypothesized that adequate
relations with peers form an important social context within which children acquire
many of their socially competent skills (Asher & Coie, 1990; Coie & Cillessen, 1993;
Ladd, 1990), including theory of mind. Children who are popular in their peer groups
may exhibit relatively advanced theory of mind skills because they enjoy more
opportunities to interact with their peers, and thereby develop their understanding of
others’ minds.

The method most commonly used to measure children’s peer acceptance was
developed by Coie and Dodge (1983) and involves all children within the peer group
making both positive and negative peer nominations. These nominations allow
researchers to calculate individual children’s social preference and social
impact
within their peer group. Social preference refers to the extent to which a child is liked
by his/her peers and is derived by subtracting children’s negative peer nominations
from their positive peer nominations. Social impact refers to the degree to which a child
is noticed by his/her peers and is derived by summing both positive and negative peer
nominations (Coie & Dodge, 1983). Based on these two measures, children can be
classified as popular, controversial, average, neglected or rejected within their peer
groups.

There is a large body of research investigating both cognitive and behavioural factors
that influence peer acceptance in school-aged children. Cognitive variables that have
emerged as important factors in influencing children’s peer status include intelligence,
language ability and perspective-taking (Coie, Dodge, & Kupersmidt, 1990). In general,
children who are relatively high on these cognitive variables are more likely to be well-
liked by their peers. There are also numerous behavioural variables that have been
shown to be related to children’s peer status. Two behavioural variables that have been
consistently shown to affect peer status are aggression and prosocial behaviour.
Aggressive behaviour generally refers to those behaviours that are either physically or
verbally aggressive to another peer, such as hitting or swearing, or those behaviours
that disrupt or disturb a peer such as snatching a book or a toy from another child
(Newcomb, Bukowski, & Pattee, 1993). Prosocial behaviour refers to those behaviours
that indicate a concern for the well-being of another person such as helping, sharing,
comforting and cooperating (Weir & Duveen, 1981). In general, those children who

Theory of mind and peer status

547
become popular in their peer group have been found to engage in high levels of
prosocial behaviour and low levels of aggressive behaviour, while children who
become rejected in their peer group tend to show the opposite pattern of behaviour in
interactions with their peers. Further, it has been suggested that rejected and popular
children are more likely to differ in their production of prosocial than aggressive
behaviours (Bukowski & Newcomb, 1984; Hartup, Glazer, & Charlesworth, 1967),
suggesting that theory of mind skills like perspective-taking and empathy that may assist
children to behave prosocially (Lalonde & Chander, 1995) could be particularly
influential in determining children’s peer acceptance.

Dekovic and Gerris (1994) investigated both prosocial behaviour and social–
cognitive abilities in school-aged children who were popular and rejected. The social–
cognitive tasks they used included affective perspective-taking, interpersonal under-
standing, prosocial moral reasoning and an empathy task. Their results confirmed that
popular children had relatively high levels of social–cognitive functioning and also
engaged in high levels of prosocial behaviour, compared to rejected children. These
differences between popular and rejected children were found to be larger for the older
children (seventh graders) than for the younger children (third graders), possibly
reflecting the cumulative nature of peer rejection. This cumulative model rests on the
assumption that the development of social–cognitive skills and peer acceptance are
mutually reinforcing, as outlined above. Those children who are rejected by their peers
are not able to gain access to a peer context that would allow them to develop the very
social skills necessary to increase their peer acceptance.

Given this cumulative model,

it becomes important to investigate factors that
influence peer acceptance and rejection in even younger children, for instance
preschoolers, who are entering into their first peer groups at the same time that they
are typically developing a theory of mind.

Several recent studies have directly examined links between preschool-aged
children’s theory of mind ability and peer acceptance. Dockett (1997) tested 3- to 5-
year-old children on their understanding of the appearance–reality distinction and false
beliefs, and measured their degree of popularity (assessed with positive peer
nominations only) within their peer group. The theory of mind scores obtained were
found to explain a significant amount of the variance in peer popularity, suggesting that
popular children may have a greater sensitivity than unpopular children to other
people’s differing psychological states.

Watson, Nixon, Wilson, and Capage (1999) found that 4- to 6-year-old children’s
theory of mind ability, measured by standard false belief tests, was not significantly
related to teacher ratings of popularity when the effects of language ability were
controlled. Theory of mind scores were, however, uniquely related to teacher ratings of
social skills across two different experiments. The lack of relation between theory of
mind ability and popularity in this study may indicate that teachers can more accurately
rate social skills, reflected in behaviour and attitudes, than popularity.

Badenes, Estevan, and Bacete (2000) investigated relations between 4- to 6-year-olds’
theory of mind ability, measured with a battery of tasks and peer acceptance, measured
with a peer nomination procedure similar to that of Coie and Dodge (1983). The
comparisons among popular, average and rejected boys and girls revealed few
differences on theory of mind measures. The popular girls were significantly better than
average or neglected girls on a deception task, though performance on the other theory
of mind tasks (including false belief) did not vary with peer acceptance. The rejected
boys performed significantly worse than their peers on one theory of mind task (the

Virginia Slaughter et al.

548
white lie task) and also demonstrated significantly more hostile attributions in tasks
requiring explanations of other people’s behaviour. Interestingly, these results held for
the older (age 6), but not the younger rejected boys, reinforcing the hypothesis that
peer rejection has cumulative effects on children’s social development.

Thus, to date, there is no clear consensus on whether and how theory of mind ability
is related to peer acceptance in preschoolers, though overall, the results of published
studies tend to suggest that popular or socially skilled children (cf. Lalonde & Chandler,
1995) may be relatively advanced in their theory of mind understanding. The two
studies reported here were designed to establish whether theory of mind ability
influences peer acceptance in preschoolers and to investigate the extent of that
influence relative to some of the behavioural variables known to be important
predictors of peer acceptance in young children. Specifically, Study 1 investigates the
hypothesis that theory of mind ability is positively related to peer acceptance in
preschool-aged children. Study 2 investigates the relative importance of theory of mind,
verbal ability and aggressive and prosocial behaviours to peer acceptance in
preschoolers.

STUDY 1

Method
Participants
The participants in this study were 80 children (41 boys, 39 girls) between the ages of
53 months (4 years, 5 months) and 72 months (6 years, 0 months). The children
attended five classes in five different child care centres in middle-class suburbs of a large
Australian city.

Class sizes ranged from 12 to 21 children, with the number of boys and girls within
each class being almost equal. Twenty-five additional children attended these classes
but did not participate in the study due to a lack of parental consent. One girl was lost
halfway through the study due to holidays, and another girl was eliminated because she
was only 48 months old (5 months younger than the next youngest child) at the time of
testing. The final sample (N = 78) represented 76.2%of students across the five classes.
All children attended the child-care centres at least 3 days per week.

Procedure and measures
Children were tested separately by a female experimenter for approximately 10–15 min
on two occasions. On the first occasion, children were given two theory of mind tasks
and a peer nomination task that was used to determine peer status. On the second
occasion, children were given the remaining three theory of mind tasks and the peer
nomination task again, so as to calculate reliability for the peer status classifications.
Eleven children had to be followed up as they were absent either on the first occasion
(N = 3) or on the second occasion (N = 8). For the final sample, 1–2 weeks passed
between occasions one and two. No more than 4 weeks passed between testing
sessions for those children who were tested on a third occasion.

Theory of mind and peer status

549

Theory of mind tasks
Five theory of mind tasks were used in the present study: two standard unexpected
contents false belief tasks (Gopnik & Astington, 1988), a conflicting emotion task, a
conflicting desire task, and a version of the Four Sweets task (Baron-Cohen, 1994). Each
of these tasks was designed to measure children’s ability to identify two different
mental-state perspectives on the same situation. See the Appendix for a full description
of tasks and task scripts.

Each task involved a short story about a child who was the same age as the
participant, and children in the stories were matched with the gender of the
participants. Pictures used within each task were presented on 25 cm 6 31 cm pieces
of cardboard. The pictures of story characters differed in hair type and colour to allow
children to differentiate between different stories. The two false belief tasks were
always presented together as they relied on the same materials. The tasks were
counterbalanced for order over the two testing occassions using a partial Latin square.

Scoring theory of mind tasks
Each theory of mind task was scored on a pass/fail basis. In order to pass a task, children
were required to answer correctly all control questions and test questions.

A total theory of mind score was computed by adding together children’s pass/fail
scores on the individual theory of mind tasks (e.g. Self belief, Other belief, Emotion,
Desire, Four Sweets).1 This composite theory of mind score was created to reflect
children’s overall, multifaceted understanding of mental states. Research has shown
significant intercorrelations among various theory of mind tasks, suggesting that they
tap aspects of a single ability (Gopnik & Astington, 1988; Moore, Pure, & Furrow, 1990;
Slaughter & Gopnik, 1996). Further, a reliability analysis on children’s performance on
the five tasks revealed a Cronbach’s alpha of .51, which was considered a reasonable
figure for internal reliability on a 5-item scale. The total theory of mind scores ranged
from 0 to 5, reflecting levels of children’s understanding of mental states.

Measurement of peer status
Children’s peer status was determined using the method described by Coie and Dodge
(1983). Peer status measures were based on the nominations taken on the testing
occasion when all children in the classroom group who were participating in the study
were present. The peer nominations of the child who was lost halfway through the
study were used in the determinations of status in her classroom group, but her theory
of mind data were not included in any analyses because she did not have a full data set.
The peer nominations of the child who was eliminated from the study because she was
an age outlier were also retained for the calculations of status in her classroom group.
Before testing commenced on the first occasion, children were photographed in
groups of one to four using a Polaroid camera. These photographs were then cut up
into strips so that children had their own individual photographs. Photographs were cut
up so that the presentation of the order of these photographs could be randomized and

1 A few children reported unexpected preferences on the control questions of the emotions (N = 2) and/or desires (N = 6)
tasks. Since these children therefore did not report a preference that was in conflict with that of the story character, their
correct answers to questions about the story characters’ desires or emotions were ambiguous; they could simply have reported
their own desires or emotions. For those children, the tasks for which they gave ambiguous answers were dropped, and their
total theory of mind scores were computed from four (instead of five) tasks, each with a weighted passing score of 1.25.

Virginia Slaughter et al.

550
so that children did not, for example, nominate three children because they were in the
same photograph together. These individual photograph strips were attached to a piece
of cardboard (31 cm 6 25 cm). After the completion of the two theory of mind tasks on
the first and second occasions of testing, children were presented with the photographs
of their classroom peers who were also participating in the study. The experimenter
guided children through the photographs of their classroom peers and asked them to
name each child. All children were familiar with the names of their classroom peers.
Children were then requested to nominate the three children they liked to play with
the most (Like Most—LM) and the three children they did not like to play with very
much (Like Least—LL). All children made three positive (LM) and negative (LL)
nominations on the testing occasion that was used for the categorization of children
into peer status groups. All nominations made by each child were considered to be of
an equivalent value in the calculation of LM nominations and LL nominations for each
child. The LM nominations and LL nominations were then standardized within each
individual classroom group. These standardized LM and LL scores were then used to
calculate a social preference score (SP) and a social impact score (SI) for each child.
Social preference scores were calculated by taking children’s individual standardized LL
score from their standardized LM score (i.e. SP = LM 7 LL). Social impact scores were
calculated by adding each child’s individual standardized LM score to their individual
standardized LL score (i.e. SI = LM + LL).

Based on these scores, children were classified into one of five peer status groups

following the procedure specified by Coie and Dodge (1983).2

Reliability of peer status measures
The correlations between children’s social impact and social preference scores derived
from nominations made on the first and second testing occasions were .78 and .50,
respectively. Agreement for peer status classifications across the two occasions was
73%, with Cohen’s kappa = .58. These figures are comparable to those reported by
Sanderson and Siegal (1995) who used a measure and a sample similar to those of the
present study. The peer status data used in the analyses were based on nominations
made on the first occasion.

Results
Correlations
Table 1 shows the zero-order correlations for age (in months), theory of mind scores,
social preference scores and social impact scores. The only significant correlation in the
matrix is that of theory of mind and social preference (Pearson’s r(76) = .27, p < 05,
two-tailed), indicating that children who scored highly on the theory of mind tasks also
had relatively high social preference scores.

Next, the correlations between theory of mind and social preference and theory of

2Popular children were those children who had a SP score greater than +1, and had standardized LM score greater than the
mean of zero, and a standardized LL score less than the mean of zero. Controversial children were those children who had a
SI score greater than +1, and had a standardized LM score and a standardized LL score greater than the mean of zero.
Average children were those children who had a SP score between 70.5 and +0.5. Neglected children were those children
who had a SI score less than 71, and had a standardized LM score and a standardized LL score below the mean of zero.
Finally rejected children were those children who had a SP score below 71 and had a standardized LM score below the mean
of zero and a standardized LL score above the mean of zero.

Theory of mind and peer status

551

Table 1. Zero-order correlations for variables in Study 1

Age
ToM score
SP score
SI score

Age

—
.01
.04
.09

ToM

—
.27*
.13

SP

—
.20

SI

—

* p < .05, two-tailed.
Note. N = 78.
ToM = theory of mind; SP = social preference; SI = social impact.

mind and social impact were rerun with age partialled out. With age controlled, theory
of mind scores and social preference scores remained significantly correlated (Pearson’s
r(76) = .27, p < .05, two-tailed). The correlation between theory of mind scores and
social
impact scores remained non-significant with age partialled out (Pearson’s
r(78) = .12, p > .10).

Given that the relation between theory of mind and peer acceptance is hypothesized
to strengthen as children get older, the partial correlation between theory of mind and
social preference was computed separately for older and younger children. The sample
was subjected to a median split such that older children were aged 61 months (5 years,
1 month) or older (N = 44; mean age = 65.4 months), and younger children were aged
60 months (5 years) and younger (N = 34; mean age = 56.5 months). The mean theory
of mind scores for the younger and older subsamples were 2.65 (SD = 1.45) and 2.81
(SD = 1.13) respectively, which is not a significant difference by paired t-test
(t(76) = .55, p > .10). The mean social preference scores also did not differ by age
group: the mean score for the younger children was 7.03 (SD = 1.80), and for the
older children, the mean social preference score was .03 (SD = 1.63; t(76) = .148).

These analyses showed that theory of mind scores and social preference scores (with
age partialled out) were not significantly related in the younger subsample (Pearson’s
r(32) = .12, p > .10). For the older subsample, the correlation between theory of mind
scores and social preference scores (with age partialled out) was significant (Pearson’s
r(42) = .39, p < .05, two-tailed).

Peer status and theory of mind
Table 2 shows the number of children classified into the five peer status groups,
together with the average age and the total theory of mind score (out of 5) for each
group. Thirteen children could not be classified into any status group. Table 3 shows
the proportion of children in each status group passing the individual theory of mind
tasks.

In order to evaluate differences in theory of mind ability among the children in
different sociometric status groups, pre-planned pairwise comparisons (Keppel &
Zedeck, 1989) were conducted. Four t-tests were run comparing high peer acceptance
(average and popular) children to low peer acceptance (rejected and neglected)
children. Since the status of controversial children is unclear with respect to peer
acceptance (as they are both liked and disliked by peers), and since the number of
controversial children in the sample was small, they were left out of this analysis. The
results indicated that popular children’s theory of mind scores were significantly higher

552

Virginia Slaughter et al.

Table 2. Mean theory of mind scores for children in five peer status groups in Study 1

Peer status

Popular
Controversial
Average
Neglected
Rejected

N

19
8
12
10
16

Average age (in months)

Theory of mind score (range 0–5)

61.6 (4.2)
62.5 (6.4)
64.3 (5.0)
59.7 (5.7)
59.8 (4.8)

3.09 (1.19)
3.28 (1.22)
2.94 (1.00)
2.53 (1.56)
2.17 (1.31)

Note. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.

Table 3. Proportion of children passing each theory of mind task by peer status group in Study 1

Self
belief

.84
1.00
.83
.60
.56

Other
belief

.63
.88
.67
.40
.50

Desire

Emotion

.53
.38
.36
.44
.33

.83
1.00
.82
.56
.75

Four
Sweets

.58
.63
.42
.20
.25

Popular
Controversial
Average
Neglected
Rejected

than those of rejected children (t(33) = 2.18, p < .05). None of the other pairwise
comparisons was significant.

Discussion
This study provided some support for the hypothesis that theory of mind ability is
related to peer acceptance. The analysis of theory of mind scores by status group
showed that popular children, whose peer status classifications reflect relatively many
‘like most’ peer nominations, scored higher on theory of mind tasks compared to
rejected children, whose classification reflects relatively few ‘like most’ nominations.
This pattern supports the hypothesis that popular children have a better understanding
of other people’s mental states, relative to their rejected peers (Badenes et al., 2000;
Dockett, 1997). An examination of children’s performance on the individual theory of
mind tasks (Table 3) suggests that children who were rejected or neglected by their
peers scored lowest on all of the theory of mind tasks, with popular and controversial
children scoring highest on all tasks and average children falling between the two
extremes.

The results of the correlational analyses showed a similar pattern, in that theory of
mind scores were modestly but significantly correlated with children’s social
preference scores, but not with their social impact scores. This pattern indicates that
across the sample, children with a relatively high theory of mind ability tended to
receive more ‘like most’ nominations than ‘like least’ nominations. The partial
correlations confirmed that theory of mind was significantly related to social preference
when age was controlled. However, when the sample was split by age, that relation
held only for children older than age 5. While the magnitudes of the correlations

Theory of mind and peer status

553
between theory of mind and peer acceptance were modest, the pattern of results
replicates previous findings of a theory of mind-peer acceptance link (Badenes et al.,
2000; Dockett, 1997); and further parallels Dekovic and Gerris’ (1994) and Badenes et
al.’s (2000) findings of an age-dependent relation between theory of mind ability and
peer acceptance in preschool and school-aged children. Overall, the results of Study 1
suggest two things: that there is a modest positive relation between theory of mind
ability and peer acceptance, and that individual differences in social–cognitive abilities
may impact more strongly on peer acceptance as children get older.

While these results are suggestive, a major limitation of Study 1 is the exclusion of
some measure of general intellectual ability. Given previous data that have linked verbal
ability with theory of mind (Jenkins & Astington, 1996) and linked intelligence with
social competence (Putallaz, 1983), the effect of intelligence on the relation between
theory of mind ability and peer acceptance should be investigated. Given the modest
effects found in Study 1, it seems certain that other variables play a role in determining
children’s peer acceptance. Thus it would also be valuable to investigate the roles of
behavioural variables such as levels of prosocial and aggressive behaviour, which have
been shown to have significant influence on children’s peer status (Bukowski &
Newcomb, 1984; Coie & Kupersmidt, 1983; Dodge, 1983). Study 2 was designed to test
the relative importance of theory of mind ability and behavioural variables to preschool
children’s peer status. Study 2 also included a measure of verbal mental age as a control
variable.

STUDY 2

Method
Participants
The participants in this study were 92 children (49 boys, 43 girls) between the ages of
48 months (4 years, 0 months) and 79 months (6 years, 7 months). The children
attended five classes, in five different child-care centres in middle-class suburbs of a
large Australian city. Class sizes ranged from 12 to 23. Thirty-five additional children
attended these classes but did not participate in the study due to lack of parental
consent. Five children (3 boys, 2 girls) were lost halfway through the study as a result of
sickness or holidays. The final sample (N = 87) represented 71%of students in the five
classes.

All children, except one, attended the child-care centres and preschool at least 3
days per week. The other child who attended two times per week however, was not
eliminated from the study as she had previously attended 4 days per week and was
familiar with the majority of children. All children had been known by their teachers for
a minimum of 3 months at the time of testing.

Procedure and measures
Children were tested individually by a female experimenter for a total of approximately
40 min per child over three occasions. On the first occasion, children were tested with
two false belief tasks and a measure of verbal intelligence. A photograph of each child
was taken on the first testing occasion. On the second occasion, children were given

Virginia Slaughter et al.

554
two different false belief tasks and the peer nomination task that was used to determine
peer status. On the third testing occasion, children completed the peer nomination task
again so as to calculate reliability for the peer status classifications. For the final sample,
2–4 weeks passed between occasions one and three.

The head teacher of each classroom group filled out a Behavioural Questionnaire

(see details below) for all children involved in the study.

Theory of mind tasks
Four different false belief tasks were used to measure theory of mind ability. These
included two different versions of the standard change in location task and two versions
of the unexpected contents task used in Study 1. One of each type of false belief task
was administered on occasions one and two. False belief tasks replaced the theory of
mind battery of tasks from Study 1 in order to reduce the amount of time required for
testing (given the addition of a test of verbal intelligence). This change in procedure
was further justified by an analysis of the results of Study 1, which found that false belief
scores correlated moderately strongly with overall theory of mind scores (r(76) = .54).

Change in location task
This standard task was adopted from Baron-Cohen, Leslie & Frith (1985). The two
versions differed only in the characters used (boy dolls versus girl dolls) and the hiding
locations employed (box versus bag).

Unexpected contents task
The format of this task was identical to the false belief task used in Study 1. One version
involved a bandaid box with a book inside, and the other version involved a crayon box
with candles inside.

Scoring false belief tasks
Each false belief task was scored on a pass/fail basis. Children were required to answer
correctly both the memory control and test questions. Atotal false belief score was then
computed by adding children’s pass/fail scores for the four individual false belief tasks,
following widely used procedure (Astington, 1993). A reliability analysis on the four
false belief tasks indicated good internal consistency, with Cronbach’s alpha = .75.

Verbal intelligence
Children’s verbal intelligence was assessed through the administration of the Peabody
Picture Vocabulary Test—Revised (PPVT) (Dunn & Dunn, 1981). Raw scores were used
in all analyses.

Behavioural Questionnaire
Head teachers in each classroom were asked to complete a Behavioural Questionnaire
for each child participating in the study. Three inventories inventories were combined
into one 57-item questionnaire containing items relating to the child’s prosocial and
aggressive behaviours, and Machiavellianism (not reported in this paper). All items on
the Behavioural Questionnaire were scored by teachers as 0 ‘rarely apply’, 1 ‘apply
somewhat’, or 2 ‘certainly apply’. Three versions of the questionnaire were developed

555
to control for potential order effects with aggression, prosocial and Machiavellian
behaviour items blocked and counterbalanced with the Latin square technique.

Theory of mind and peer status

The 20 items assessing prosocial behaviour were taken from the Prosocial Behaviour
Questionnaire developed by Weir and Duveen (1981). Examples of items include: ‘Will
clap or smile if someone else does something well in class’, ‘Comforts a child who is
crying or upset’, ‘Will invite bystanders to join in a game’. To calculate a total prosocial
behaviour score, the scores for each item were added together. The possible range for a
prosocial behaviour score was 0–40.

The 25 items assessing children’s levels of aggressive behaviour were taken from the
aggression subscale of the Child Behaviour Checklist (Achenbach & Edelbrock, 1983).
Example items include: ‘Destroys property belonging to others’, ‘Threatens people’,
‘Temper tantrums or hot temper’. To form a total aggressive behaviour score, the scores
from each aggression item in the Behavioural Questionnaire were added together. This
score could range from 0 to 50.

Measurement of peer status
As in Study 1, children’s peer status was determined using the method described by
Coie and Dodge (1983). The peer nominations provided by the five children lost
halfway through the study were retained and used in the calculation of peer status.

Reliability of peer status measures
The correlations between children’s social impact and social preference scores derived
from nominations made on the first and second testing occasions were .65 and .77,
respectively. Agreement for peer status classifications across the two occasions was
53%, with Cohen’s kappa = .41. These figures are comparable to those found in Study
1. As in Study 1, the nominations made on the first occasion were used to calculate
children’s peer status.

Results
Correlations among independent variables
Table 4 shows the zero-order correlations among all the variables measured. PPVT
scores were significantly related to age, theory of mind scores, prosocial behaviour
scores and aggression scores, but not to social preference or social impact scores.
Theory of mind scores were significantly positively correlated with age and prosocial
behaviour scores but were not significantly correlated with aggression scores, social
preference or social impact scores. Social preference scores were positively correlated
with prosocial behaviour scores and negatively correlated with aggression scores.
Finally, prosocial behaviour scores and aggression scores showed a significant negative
correlation.

In order to examine further the links between theory of mind, behaviour and peer
acceptance variables, the correlations were re-computed with age and PPVT scores
partialled out. When age and PPVT scores were partialled out, theory of mind scores
were no longer significantly correlated with prosocial behaviour scores (Pearson’s
r(85) = .08, p >.10). The negative correlation between prosocial behaviour and
aggression remained significant when age and PPVT were partialled out (Pearson’s

556

Virginia Slaughter et al.

Table 4. Zero-order correlation matrix for cognitive and behavioural variables in Study 2

Age

PPVT

ToM

Aggression

Prosocial

SP

SI

Age
PPVT
ToM
Aggression
Prosocial
SP
SI

—
.43**
.34**

7.08
.14
.14
7.02

—
.35**
7.20^
.35**
.19
7.12

—
7.11

.35**
.11
7.02

—

7.47**
7.30**

.10

—
.36**

7.08

—
.03

—

* p < .01, two-tailed test; ^ p < .06, two-tailed test.
Note. N = 87.
PPVT = Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test; ToM = theory of mind; SP = social preference; SI = social
impact.

r(85) = 7.44, p < .05). The correlations between social preference scores and the
behavioural variable scores remained significant after partialling out age and PPVT
scores: the social preference and aggression partial correlation was r(85) = 727,
p < .05 and the social preference and prosocial behaviour partial correlation was
r(85) = .32, p < .05.

Multiple regression analysis: predicting social preference
To investigate the relative importance of the various cognitive and behavioural variables
to children’s peer acceptance, a standard multiple regression was performed with social
preference as the criterion measure, and PPVT, theory of mind, aggression, and
prosocial behaviour scores as the predictors. Age was not entered into the regression in
order to limit the number of variables and to reduce collinearity in the model.

All variables were entered into the model at step 1. The overall R2 was .15 (adjusted
R2 = .11) which was significant (F(4,86) = 3.71, p < .05). Examination of the individual
beta weights revealed prosocial behaviour scores as the only significant independent
predictor of social preference scores, with beta = .26, t(85) = 2.12, p < .05. The beta
values for the remaining predictors were as follows: PPVT beta = .06, theory of mind
beta = .02, aggression beta = 7 .16 (all ts < 1.5, ps > .10).

Theory of mind and social preference by age group
Following the procedure established in Study 1, the regression analyses were rerun
separately for younger and older children. The sample was split as in Study 1 such that
older children were 61 months or older (N = 41; mean age = 65.9 months), and
younger children were age 60 months and younger (N = 46; mean age = 55.9 months).
The regression analyses for the younger subsample revealed that the overall model
was significant, with adjusted R2 = .18, F(4, 46) = 3.39, p < .05. Examination of the
individual beta weights revealed that prosocial behaviour score was a significant
independent predictor and that aggression score approached significance as an
independent predictor of social preference in the children under age 5 years. The
prosocial beta = .33,
t(44) = 1.84,
p < .08. The non-significant betas were as follows: PPVT beta = 7.11, theory of mind
beta = 7.16, both ts(44) < 1.15, ps > .10.

t(44) = 2.05, p < .05; aggression beta = 7.28,

557
In the older subsample, the overall adjusted R2 was .08, which was not significant,
F(4,36) = 1.84, p > .10. However, examination of the individual beta weights revealed
that theory of mind score was the best predictor of social preference score for children
over age 5 years, approaching significance with beta = .32, t(40) = 1.81, p < .08. The
non-significant beta’s for the older subsample were as follows: PPVT beta = 7.01,
prosocial beta = .19, aggression beta = 7.01, all ts(40) < 1.04, ps > .10.

Theory of mind and peer status

Multiple regression analysis: predicting social impact
Afinal standard multiple regression was performed on data from the entire sample with
social impact as the criterion measure, and PPVT, theory of mind, aggression, and
prosocial behaviour scores as the predictors. The overall model was not significant,
with the total R2 = .02, F(4,82) = .43, p > .10. None of the individual beta weights
exceeded .11.

Theory of mind and peer status
Table 5 shows the number of children classified into the five peer status groups,
together with the average ages, scores on the PPVT, and scores for theory of mind,
prosocial and aggressive behaviour. Nine children could not be classified into any status
group.

Table 5. Mean age and scores for children in the five peer status groups in Study 2

Peer
status

Popular

Controversial

Average

Neglected

Rejected

N

19

9

16

14

20

Age

(months)

False belief
(range 0–4)

Prosocial

(range 0–40)

Aggression
(range 0–50)

61.5
(6.2)
61.6
(6.4)
61.1
(6.0)
60.5
(6.2)
59.4
(6.0)

3.16
(1.02)
2.00
(1.58)
3.06
(.93)
2.29
(1.49)
2.80
(1.44)

24.63
(8.20)
16.11
(6.49)
16.81
(10.5)
20.71
(10.18)
14.00
(10.46)

4.42
(6.91)
14.67
(10.49)
7.38
(9.34)
10.57
(13.05)
15.90
(14.69)

PPVT
(raw
score)

54.68
(15.02)
45.33
(9.45)
52.80
(16.84)
50.70
(17.49)
44.70
(9.85)

Note. Mean scores in bold typeface; Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.

In order to evaluate differences in theory of mind ability among the different status
groups while controlling for verbal ability, a one-way ANCOVA was run with theory of
mind scores as the dependent variable, peer status groups (five levels) as the factor and
PPVT score entered as a covariate. This analysis revealed a significant main effect of
PPVT on theory of mind scores (F(1,68) = 6.75, p < .05) but no independent effect of
status on theory of mind scores (F(4,68) = 1.14, p > .10) and no interaction
(F(4,68) = .629, p > .10). Follow-up tests using Fisher’s Protected Least Significant
Difference procedure revealed that the PPVT scores of popular and rejected children
were significantly different (p < .05).

Virginia Slaughter et al.

558
Discussion
The results of Study 2 partially replicate patterns found in Study 1, but highlight the
need for consideration of multiple variables in explaining peer acceptance in young
children. While the theory of mind scores of the different peer status groups showed a
similar pattern to that found in Study 1, with popular children achieving the highest
scores and neglected and rejected children earning relatively low scores, when verbal
ability was taken into account in the ANCOVA, the differences in theory of mind ability
among children in the different peer status groups were not significant. Thus, the
results of Study 2 indicated no significant effect of theory of mind ability on children’s
peer status, over and above the effect of verbal intelligence. This result confirms
previous work showing that bright, verbally adept children tend to be relatively popular
among their peers (Coie et al., 1990; Putallaz, 1983).

It should be noted that the pattern of results for controversial children in Study 2 was
opposite that found in Study 1. In Study 1, controversial children received the highest
theory of mind scores of all children, while in Study 2, their scores were the lowest of
the peer status groups. The controversial group is typically the smallest peer status
group in the population (as in both studies reported here), and the most fluid
(Newcombe et al., 1993), with features of both popular (many positive peer
nominations) and rejected (many negative peer nominations) groups. Clearly, more
work will be required to understand the theory of mind abilities of children whose peer
status is controversial.

Variations in the behavioural variables by peer status groups generally replicated the
reliable pattern seen in previous studies. Popular children received high prosocial
behaviour scores and low aggression scores, while rejected children showed the
opposite pattern. Controversial children were also relatively high on aggression.
Surprisingly, neglected children in this study were rated as being relatively high on
prosocial behaviour, which is not consistent with previous studies; generally, neglected
children have been found to engage in relatively low levels of prosocial behaviour (Coie
et al., 1990; Newcombe et al., 1993). This anomalous finding could have been
produced by the fact that children’s ratings determined peer status, but teachers’
ratings determined behaviour scores. If neglected children are ignored by their peers,
they may spend more time than other children interacting with their teachers, in which
case they might be likely to behave prosocially toward their teachers, for instance by
being cooperative or helping when asked.

The correlations between behavioural and cognitive variables were also in line with
previous research, with prosocial and aggressive behaviour significantly negatively
correlated, even when verbal ability and age were controlled. The significant zero-order
correlation between theory of mind ability and prosocial behaviour was found not to be
significant after age and verbal ability were partialled out. This pattern is in contrast to a
recent study by Spatz and Cassidy (1999) in which theory of mind ability was found to
be modestly but significantly related to prosocial behaviour even after the effects of
language ability were partialled out. Given the theoretical and empirical links between
socio-cognitive skill and prosocial behaviour (Dekovic & Gerris, 1994; Shantz, 1983),
further investigation of the relation between theory of mind ability and prosocial
behaviour is warranted. If the correlation between theory of mind and prosocial
behaviour is only modest, the effect may be difficult to replicate and may be strongly
influenced by the methods used to measure prosocial behaviour.

Finally, the correlation and regression analyses partially replicated the pattern found

Theory of mind and peer status

559
in Study 1. In contrast to Study 1, there was no significant zero-order correlation
between theory of mind ability and social preference scores for the entire sample. For
the full sample, prosocial behaviour was the only significant predictor of social
preference scores,
in line with previous work suggesting that levels of prosocial
behaviour are among the most reliable behavioural discriminators of popular and
rejected children (Bukowski & Newcomb, 1984; Hartup et al., 1967). The regression
analyses by age group indicated that the behavioural variables of aggression and
prosocial behaviour were the best predictors of social preference for the younger
children in the sample. For the older children, in contrast, theory of mind ability was
the best predictor of social preference. This pattern replicates Study 1; its potential
significance will be discussed below.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
The two studies reported here, like the literature reviewed in the introduction, do not
paint a completely clear picture of the relation between theory of mind and peer
acceptance, but highlight the complexity of influences on young children’s peer
acceptance. These studies were designed to assess the relation between theory of mind
ability and peer acceptance in preschool-aged children, to try to establish whether, as
hypothesized, theory of mind skill is related to peer popularity. The results of the
studies provide some support for that hypothesis. Study 1 found a significant difference
between popular and rejected children’s theory of mind ability, but that result was not
replicated in Study 2 when verbal ability was controlled. The pattern of zero-order
correlations in Study 2 did not suggest that verbal ability is a mediator of the relation
between theory of mind ability and peer acceptance because in Study 2 (unlike Study
1), theory of mind scores and social preference scores did not themselves correlate
significantly (Baron & Kenny, 1986). This pattern suggests that the theory of mind
discrepancy between popular and rejected children comes down to a significant
difference in verbal ability between the two groups, as was found in Study 2.

While the results for theory of mind ability by peer status group were somewhat
inconclusive, the results from both studies clearly indicated that theory of mind ability
may become an important determinant of peer acceptance for children over age 5. The
relevant finding from Study 1 was that theory of mind scores were significantly related
to social preference scores only for the older children, and similarly from Study 2, the
data indicated that theory of mind ability was the best predictor of social preference in
the children over age 5. An age-dependent relationship between theory of mind and
peer acceptance was thus replicated across the two studies, even when the important
variables of verbal intelligence and prosocial and aggressive behaviour were accounted
for in Study 2.

The results of Study 2 indicated that for younger children, behaviour was the most
important predictor of peer acceptance. Children under age 5 who were generally well
liked by their peers (reflected in relatively many positive peer nominations and few
negative nominations) were those who were also rated by their teachers as being highly
prosocial and non-aggressive. This finding can be interpreted with respect to children’s
conceptions of friendship that indicate that young children view friends primarily in
terms of their interpersonal behaviour, that is, friends are those peers with whom they
play and share toys (Bigelow, 1977; Damon, 1988). Thus, in children under age 5, an

Virginia Slaughter et al.

560
understanding of, and sensitivity to, others’ mental states may not be as relevant to
determinations of peer status as is behaviour (Selman, 1981).

in children over age 5,

In children older than age 5, however, theory of mind ability was the best predictor
of peer acceptance. Again, this finding can be understood in terms of children’s
developing conceptions of friendship, as the research indicates that as children get
older, they begin to appreciate friends for their attitudes and unique personality
attributes. For older children, a friend is someone who shares desires, goals and
attitudes (Bigelow, 1977; Damon, 1988). Thus,
the
understanding of other people’s mental states that characterizes theory of mind may
become highly important in peer relationships. Children over age 5 who are lacking, or
slower to develop, theory of mind ability may be unable to enter deeply into peer
relations, and this feature may cause them to be less popular within their peer groups.
The finding that theory of mind ability relates to peer acceptance in older but not
younger children is also in line with previous studies that have demonstrated that the
socio-cognitive differences between popular and rejected children are more
pronounced in older samples (Badenes et al., 2000; Dekovic & Gerris, 1994). The
pattern of results supports the cumulative model of peer rejection and suggests that a
delay in acquiring the ability to predict and explain others’ behaviour with reference to
internal, subjective mental states may have serious implications for children’s peer
relationships. Children who are delayed relative to their peers in the development of
the ability to reason about the internal feelings, thoughts and motivations of others may
not be able to function sensitively with potential friends in their peer groups. If these
children then become neglected or rejected by their peers, their opportunities to
experience social interactions that could facilitate theory of mind development would
diminish. Given the demonstrated importance of social interaction on theory of mind
development (Dunn, 1995; Ruffman et al., 1998), the potential damaging effects of
early peer rejection are substantial.

The results of the present studies suggest that, as children enter school, theory of
mind ability may play an important role in the development of healthy peer relations.
Thus, 5-year-olds who are delayed on theory of mind ability at school entry might
benefit from theory of mind training as they are beginning to enter into peer group
relations. Given that intervention programs designed to increase the social acceptance
of rejected children have typically been behaviour-based and the results have been
inconsistent (see Mize, Ladd, & Price, 1985 for a review), it seems worthwhile to
consider the possibility that theory of mind training with vulnerable 5-year-olds could
attenuate some cases of peer rejection and avoid its cumulative effects on social–
cognitive development.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the children, parents and teachers at the schools we visited whose
generous cooperation made these studies possible. We also thank Peter Newcombe, Candi
Peterson, Betty Repacholi, Michael Siegal and three anonymous reviewers for valuable comments
on the manuscript.

Theory of mind and peer status

561

References
Achenbach, T., & Edelbrock, C. (1983). Manual for the child behaviour checklist and revised
child behaviour profile. Burlington, VT: Department of Psychology, University of Vermont.
Asher, S., & Coie, J. (1990). Peer rejection in childhood. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Astington, J. (1993). The child’s discovery of the mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Badenes, L., Estevan, R., & Bacete, F. (2000). Theory of mind and peer rejection at school. Social

Development, 9(3), 271–283.

Baron, R., & Kenny, D.

(1986). The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic and statistical considerations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173–1182.

Baron-Cohen, S. (1994). How to build a baby who can read minds. Current Psychology of

Cognition, 13(5), 513–552.

Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does the autistic child have theory of mind?

Cognition, 21, 37–46.

Bigelow, B. (1977). Children’s friendship expectations: A cognitive developmental study. Child

Development, 49, 246–253.

Bukowski, W., & Newcomb, A. (1984). Stability and determinants of sociometric status and

friendship choice: A longitudinal perspective. Developmental Psychology, 20, 941–952.

Coie, J. D., & Cillessen, A. H. (1993). Peer rejection: Origins and effects on children’s

development. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 2(3), 89–92.

Coie, J. D., & Dodge, K. A. (1983). Continuities and changes in children’s social status: Afive year

longitudinal study. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 29, 261–282.

Coie, J. D., Dodge, K. A., & Kupersmidt, J. B. (1990). Peer group behavior and social status. In S.
R. Asher & J. D. Coie (Eds.), Peer rejection in childhood (pp. 17–59). New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Coie, J. D., & Kupersmidt, J. B. (1983). A behavioral analysis of emerging social status in boys’

groups. Child Development, 54, 1400–1416.

Damon, W. (1988). The moral child. New York: Free Press.
Dekovic, M., & Gerris, J. R. M. (1994). Developmental analysis of social cognitive and behavioral
differences between popular and rejected children. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 15, 367–386.

Dockett, S. (1997). Young children’s peer popularity and theories of mind. Poster presentation
at the biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development, Washington, DC,
April, 1997.

Dodge, K. A. (1983) Behavioral antecedents of peer social status. Child Development, 54, 1386–

1399.

Dunn, J. (1994). Changing minds and changing relationships. In C. Lewis & P. Mitchell (Eds.)

Origins of a theory of mind (pp. 297–310). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Dunn, J. (1995). Children as psychologists: The later correlates of individual differences in

understanding of emotions and other minds. Cognition and Emotion, 9(2/3), 187–201.

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. (1981). Peabody picture vocabulary test—revised. Circle Pines, MN:

American Guidance Service.

Flavell, J., & Miller, P. (1998). Social cognition, In W. Damon (Ed.-in-chief) and D. Kuhn & R.
Siegler (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: 5th ed., Vol. 2. Cognition, perception and
language (pp. 851–898). New York: Wiley.

Gopnik, A., & Astington, J. (1988) Children’s understanding of representational change and its
relation to the understanding of false belief and the appearance–reality distinction. Child
Development, 59, 26–37.

Hartup, W. W., Glazer, J. A., & Charlesworth, R. (1967). Peer reinforcement and sociometric

status. Child Development, 38, 1017–1024.

Jenkins, J., & Astington, J. (1996). Cognitive factors and family structure associated with theory of

mind development in young children. Developmental Psychology, 32, 70–78.

562

Virginia Slaughter et al.

Keppell, G., & Zedeck, S. (1989). Data analysis for research designs: Analysis of variance and

multiple regression/correlation approaches. New York: Freeman.

Ladd, G. W. (1990). Having friends, keeping friends, making friends and being liked by peers in
the classroom: Predictors of children’s early school adjustment? Child Development, 61,
1081–1100.

Lalonde, C. E., & Chandler, M. J. (1995). False belief understanding goes to school: On the social–
emotional consequences of coming early or late to a first theory of mind. Cognition and
Emotion, 9(2/3), 167–185.

Mize, J., Ladd, G. W., & Price, J. M. (1985). Promoting positive peer relations with young children.

Child Care Quarterly, 14, 221–237.

Moore, C., Pure, K., & Furrow, D. (1990). Children’s understanding of the modal expression of
speaker certainty and uncertainty and its relation to the development of a representational
theory of mind. Child Development, 61, 722–730.

Newcomb, A. F., Bukowski, W. M., & Pattee, L. (1993). Children’s peer relations: Ameta-analytic
review of popular, rejected, neglected, controversial, and average sociometric status.
Psychological Bulletin, 113(1), 99–128.

Peterson, C., & Slaughter, V. (2002). Opening windows into the mind: Mothers’ explanations of
false belief understanding, University of Queensland.

states and children’s

mental
Unpublished manuscript.

Putallaz, M.

(1983). Predicting children’s sociometric status from their behavior. Child

Development, 54(6), 1417–1426.

Ruffman, T., Perner, J., Naito, M., Parkin, L., & Clements, W. (1998). Older (but not younger)

siblings facilitate false belief understanding. Developmental Psychology, 34, 171–171.

Ruffman, T., Perner, J., & Parkin, L. (1999). How parenting style affects false belief understanding.

Social Development, 8, 395–411.

Sanderson, J. A., & Siegal, M. (1995). Loneliness and stable friendship in rejected and nonrejected

preschoolers. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 16, 555–567.

Selman, R. (1981). The child as a friendship philosopher. In S. Asher & J. Gottman (Eds.), The
development of children’s friendships (pp. 242–271). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Shantz, C. (1983). Social cognition. In J. Flavell & E. Markman (Eds.), Handbook of child

psychology: Vol. 3, Cognitive development (pp. 495–555). New York: Wiley.

Slaughter, V., & Gopnik, A. (1996). Conceptual coherence in the child’s theory of mind: Training

children to understand belief. Child Development, 67(6), 2967–2988.

Spatz, J., & Cassidy, K. (1999). Theory of mind and prosocial behaviour in preschool children.
Poster presented at the biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development,
Albuquerque, NM, April 1999.

Sutton, J., Smith, P., & Swettenham, J. (1999). Social cognition and bullying: Social inadequacy or

skilled manipulation? British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 17, 435–450.

Taylor, M., & Carlson, S. (1997). The relation between individual differences in fantasy and theory

of mind. Child Development, 68(3), 436–455.

Watson, A., Nixon, C., Wilson, A., & Capage, L. (1999). Social interaction skills and theory of mind

in young children. Developmental Psychology, 35, 386–391.

Weir, K., & Duveen, G., (1981). Further development and validation of the prosocial behaviour
questionnaire for use by teachers. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 22(4), 357–
374.

Wellman, H. (1990). The child’s theory of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Received 3 May 2000; revised version received 21 January 2002

Theory of mind and peer status

563

Appendix: Theory of Mind Task Scripts for Study 1
False belief tasks
Children were shown a Smarties sweets box and asked, ‘What do you think is inside this box?’
The experimenter then emptied the box revealing pens inside. The pens were then placed back
inside the box and the experimenter presented the closed Smarties box to the children again.
Children were then asked a memory control question, ‘Can you remember what’s really inside
this box?’ The children were then asked two test questions: ‘What did you think was inside this
box when I first showed it to you?’ (Self question) and ‘When I show this box to [story character’s
name] tonight what will he/she think is inside, before he/she opens it?’ (Other question). These
two test questions were scored as separate false belief tasks.

Desire task
Children were presented with a story in which the child story character’s favourite food was raw
vegetables. The children were then asked to help the experimenter decide which of two snacks
she should give to the child story character: raw vegetables versus lollies. Children were asked a
memory control question: ‘Can you remember what [story character’s name] favourite food is?’
Children were then asked the test question: ‘Which snack do you think [story character’s name]
would want to eat?’ This question was followed by two further control questions which asked,
‘Which is your favourite of these two foods: raw vegetables or lollies?’ and ‘Which snack would
you want to eat?’ These control questions were included to ensure that children were not simply
reporting their own mental states, when asked about those of the story character. The forced
choice options (raw vegetables and lollies) were counterbalanced across children.

Emotion task
The emotion task used in this study took basically the same form as the desire task. Children
presented with a story in which the child story character wanted a pair of black socks for his/her
upcoming birthday. However, when the story character opened up his/her birthday present,
there was a Barbie doll (for girls) or a toy racing car (for boys) inside. Children were then asked a
memory control question: ‘What did [story character’s name] want for his/her birthday?’ Children
were then presented with an illustration of the story character with a happy face and an
illustration of the story character with a sad face and were asked the test question, ‘How do you
think [story character’s name] felt when he/she saw the [Barbie doll/toy racing car]? Would he/
she be happy or sad?’ The presentation of the forced choice options (happy and sad) was
counterbalanced across children. This test question was then followed by two control questions
which asked, ‘Which would you want for your birthday: black socks or a Barbie doll/toy racing
car?’ and ‘How would you feel if you got a Barbie doll/toy racing car for your birthday? Would you
feel happy or sad?’ Again, these control questions were included to ensure that children were not
simply reporting their own mental states when asked about those of the story character.

Four sweets task
This task was modified from the task developed by Baron-Cohen (1994). Children were presented
with four chocolate bar wrappers secured to a piece of card and asked ‘Which chocolate bar do
you like the most out of these four?’ Children were then told a story about a child who went
shopping with his/her mother and was so well-behaved that his/her mother allowed him/her to
choose a treat out of four different types of chocolate bars. Children were then presented with a
picture that had the story character’s face in the centre, with four chocolate bar wrappers
secured in each corner. The story character was smiling and looking at one of the chocolate bars.
The experimenter always selected versions of the picture in which the story character was

564

Virginia Slaughter et al.

looking at a chocolate bar that was different from the child’s previously stated preference.
Children were then asked, ‘Can you tell me looking at this picture which chocolate bar [story
character’s name] wanted?’ The exact same scenario outlined above was presented to children
again, except that in the second story, the child went shopping with his/her grandmother.
Children were then asked, ‘Can you tell me looking at this picture which chocolate bar [story
character’s name] wanted this time?’

