British Journal of Developmental Psychology (1999), 17, 435–450 Printed in Great Britain
© 1999 The British Psychological Society

435

Social cognition and bullying: Social inadequacy

or skilled manipulation?

J. Sutton*, P. K. Smith and J. Swettenham
Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths College, London, UK

In contrast to the popular stereotype and research tradition of the ‘oash’ bully lacking
in social  skills  and understanding,  the bully may be a cold,  manipulative  expert in
social situations,  organizing gangs and using subtle,  indirect methods. Performance
on a set of stories  designed to assess  understanding  of cognitions  and emotions  was
investigated in 193 7–10-year-olds in relation to role in bullying. Ringleader bullies
scored  higher  than  ‘follower’  bullies  (those  who  helped  or  supported  the  bully),
victims  and defenders  of the victim.  Results  are  discussed  in terms  of the need for
further  research  into  cognitive  skills  and  emotion  understanding  in  children  who
bully,  the  possible  developmental  pathway  of  social  cognition  in  bullying  and
important implications for intervention strategies.

Over  the last  decade,  bullying  among young children  has  expanded  considerably  as  a
research issue. It is now recognised as a worldwide problem, with investigation originat-
ing in Norway  (Olweus,  1978) and spreading to  Australia  (e.g.  Rigby  & Slee,  1991),
Canada (Pepler, Craig, Zeigler & Charach, 1993) and the USA (Ross, 1996). As many as
one in four primary school children in the UK report being bullied at least ‘sometimes’
during the last school term (Whitney & Smith, 1993). Although intervention projects
have had some success (Olweus, 1993; Smith & Sharp, 1994), none of these school-based
programmes have reduced bullying by more than about 50%. Evidence from individual
schools and reports from teachers in such projects (e.g. Eslea & Smith, 1998) suggest that
there may be a ‘hard core’ of children who bully. Academics and practitioners may need
to consider in more detail the cognitive style and skills associated with such persistent
bullying or victimization. This study considers the issue of the social cognition or ‘theory
of  mind’  abilities  of  children  involved  in  bullying:  how  well  do  they  understand  the
mental states, beliefs and emotions of others?

It  has  been  argued  (Sutton,  Smith  &  Swettenham,  1999)  that  despite  the  popular
stereotype of a bully as physically  powerful yet intellectually  simple or backward (‘the
‘‘oaf ’’’ of literature  who torments the school  swot’: Besag, 1989, p. 15), there  is little
empirical evidence to support this view. Randall (1997) claims that ‘bullies do not process
social information accurately’ (p. 23), describing them as ‘socially blind’. Hazler (1996)

* Requests for reprints should be addressed to Jon Sutton, Department of Psychology, Glasgow Caledonian
University, City Campus, Cowcaddens Road, Glasgow G42 7PU, UK (e-mail:  J.M.Sutton@gcal.ac.uk).

436

J. Sutton et al.

suggests  that  bullies  ‘need  to  recognize  information  about  how  others  perceive  the
situation’ (p. 98). But considering the social context and nature of bullying, it would seem
plausible that many children who bully can actually process such social information very
accurately, and they may use this skill to their advantage.

Sutton  et  al. (1999)  argued  that  views  of  children  who  bully  as  lacking  in  social
perspective-taking  skills  have  not  been  based  on  empirical  work  involving  bullies:
instead,  theory  and  equivocal  evidence  from  research  using  aggressive  or  conduct
disordered children may have formed their basis. For example, the social skills model of
aggression (Dodge, Pettit, McClaskey & Brown, 1986; updated by Crick & Dodge, 1994)
has been inuential  in explaining  childhood aggression  in terms  of  social  information
processing biases or decits at one or more of the following points in a ve-stage process
of assessing and responding to social situations: social perception, interpretation of social
cues perceived, goal selection, response strategy generation and response decisions. Several
studies have found that aggressive children tend to attribute hostile intent to the actions
of  others  more  frequently  than  do  non-aggressive  children  (Feldman  & Dodge, 1987;
Gibbins &  Craig, 1997; Guerra  &  Slaby,  1989; Steinberg  &  Dodge, 1983) However,
Dodge (1991) distinguishes between reactive  aggression (occurring in the context of a
negatively affectively-charged, high conict relationship) and proactive aggression (coer-
cive  behaviour  observed  in  the  domination  of  a  peer),  and  hypothesises  that  ‘the
processing  patterns  at  each  step  might  be  more  strongly  associated  with  one  type  of
aggression than the other’ (p. 211). Crick & Dodge (1996) note that proactive aggressors
are not particularly vulnerable to attributional biases, and Boulton & Smith (1994) note
that it is only proactive aggression that includes bullying.

A recently dominant paradigm in the study of social cognitive abilities is that of ‘theory
of mind’: the ability of individuals to attribute mental states to themselves and others in
order to explain and predict behaviour (Premack & Woodruff, 1978; for a recent review,
see Taylor, 1996). Research has often investigated the part a theory of mind plays in the
development of appropriate or pro-social behaviour, but theory of mind has only recently
been  considered  in  relation  to  social  maladjustment  and  anti-social  behaviour.  Social
impairment in children with conduct disorder has been investigated in terms of a theory
of  mind decit.  Thus, Happé & Frith (1996) found that such participants  passed two
standard rst-order false belief tasks but showed impairments of social insight in real life
behaviour  as  measured  by  the  Vineland  Adaptive  Behaviour  Scale  (Sparrow,  Balla  &
Cicchetti, 1984).

The  idea  that  a  child  who  bullies  may  be  different  from  an  aggressive  or  conduct
disordered child in terms of theory of mind ability rests on consideration of how bullying
can be dened, the context in which it occurs and the roles which children assume within
this context, and the skills which may be of use (see Sutton et al., 1999).

Bullying can be dened as ‘the systematic abuse of power’ (Smith & Sharp, 1994). This
inequality  of  power  implies  dominance,  and  (in  contrast  to  the  more  general  eld  of
aggression) dominance is often associated with social skills and manipulation of belief. For
example,  Keating  &  Heltman  (1994)  found  that  pre-school  children  who  deceived
successfully (were judged as honest by adult researchers when persuading another child
that  a  nasty-tasting  drink  was  pleasant)  also  tended  to  be  those  who  terrorised  the
playground and were rated as dominant. The implication of repetitive behaviour in the
denition above may also suggest planning, which could well involve theory of mind: in

Social cognition and bullying

437

fact, Happé & Frith (1996) found that the children in their study most clearly  showed
their mentalizing abilities in the domains of lying, cheating, teasing and bullying.

Bullying  occurs  within  social  relationships  (Lagerspetz,  Bjorkqvist,  Berts  &  King,
1982) and usually with peers present (Pepler & Craig, 1995). These peers may take on
several  roles,  in addition to Bully and Victim:  they may help the bully (Assistant),  or
reinforce  the  bully  through  watching,  laughing  and  shouting  encouragement  (Rein-
forcer). Alternatively, they may stick up for the victim (Defender), or remain resolutely
uninvolved  (Outsider).  Using  this  Participant  Role  Scale  approach  (PRS),  Salmivalli,
Lagerspetz,  Bjorkqvist,  Österman  &  Kaukiainen  (1996) found that  it  was  possible  to
assign one of these roles to 87% of 11 to 13-year-old Finnish children. Having a grasp of
the internal mental states of those involved, along with an ability to manipulate these
thoughts and beliefs, may be crucial for the bully in developing and maintaining such
inter-role relations. A Bully would be at a social advantage if he or she were to possess
social cognition skills that were superior to the Followers (Assistants and Reinforcers) and
the Victims.

The use of social cognition skills in bullying may also relate to the type of bullying.
Indirect  or  relational  forms  of  aggression  (Crick  &  Grotpeter,  1995)  such  as  social
exclusion (Bjorkqvist, Lagerspetz & Kaukiainen, 1992) often require a manipulation of
the mental states and beliefs of others in the form of gossip, rumours and lies. Indeed,
indirect  aggression  has  been  found  to  be  positively  correlated  with  peer-rated  social
intelligence in groups of 8-, 12- and 14-year-olds, whereas physical and verbal aggression
were not (Kaukiainen et al., 1999). Indirect bullying is also relatively  more frequent in
girls than boys (Bjorkqvist et al., 1992; Rivers & Smith, 1994), and a recent study found
a theory of mind superiority among girls (Baron-Cohen & Hammer, 1996). In contrast, it
may  be that a  theory of mind is  not necessary  for  purely physical  bullying: hitting or
kicking someone would seem to be a non-mental event, and consequently one may not
necessarily expect physical bullying to be related to theory of mind.

Sutton et al. (1999) argued that more investigation was needed to investigate the theory
of mind skills used in bullying; they suggested distinguishing different types of bullies,
and measuring different aspects of theory of mind ability. Here, a study of this kind is
reported. The PRS approach was used in conjunction with social cognition measures to
investigate the following hypotheses:

(a)

(b)

(c)

that  Bullies  will  score  signicantly  higher  than  Victims  on  a  set  of  stories
measuring social cognition;
that Bullies will score signicantly higher than Followers (a combined group of
Reinforcers and Assistants) on a set of stories measuring social cognition; and
that extent of  teacher-rated  indirect  bullying will  be positively  correlated  with
total social cognition score when physical and verbal bullying are partialled out.

The study intends to discriminate clearly between two alternative predictions. The social
skills decit model (Crick & Dodge, 1994) should predict that bullies would score lower
than other children on theory of mind tasks; this would follow from the view of decits
and  biases  in  perceiving  and  interpreting  the  situation,  and  choosing  and  reporting
responses to it. By contrast, the present authors’ prediction is that on a test of theory of

438

J. Sutton et al.

mind, Ringleader Bullies would score higher than Followers (hypothesis A) or Victims
(hypothesis B), and possibly higher than non-involved children.

Participants

Method

The  authors  approached  all  the children  in  eight  classes  from  four  South-East  London  schools,  a  total
sample pool of 206. Children who refused to give consent or had a parent refuse consent at the start of the
study were not included (N = 13). The nal sample was 193 children (102 girls and 91 boys) aged between
7 years 7 months and 10 years 8 months (mean 9 years 0 months). Although socio-economic measures were
not taken,  the school  catchment  areas  were lower-  to middle-class.  The ethnic mix  was 38.3%  White,
45.4%  African-Carribean,  10.2%  Asian,  1.5%  Mediterranean,  and 4.6%  of  mixed  ethnic  origin.  Class
sizes varied from 20 to 29 pupils (M = 25).

Measures

Verbal ability. The short form of the British Picture Vocabulary Scale (BPVS) (Dunn, Dunn, Whetton &
Pintilie, 1982) was included as a control measure to ensure that any difference in theory of mind was not
explained by differences  in understanding the language of the stories.

Role  in  bullying. A  shortened  version  of  the  PRS  (Salmivalli  et  al.,  1996)  was  presented  as  a  self/peer
nomination interview rather than the questionnaire format of the original, because this method was found
to be more suited for use with 7 to 10-year-olds  (see Sutton & Smith,  1999, for details  of this adapted
version). Peer and self-nominations  were given for a set of behaviour descriptions in each of the following
roles:

Bully:
Assistant:
Reinforcer:
Defender:
Outsider:
Victim:

active, initiative taking, leader-like behaviour
active, but more follower than leader-like
inciting the bully, providing an audience etc.
sticking up for or consoling the victim
doing nothing in bullying situations,  staying away
nominated in ‘gets bullied’ by 30% of same sex classmates.

The  internal  reliability  for  these  six  subscales  was  moderate  to  good  (Cronbach’s  alphas:  Bully  a
Reinforcer a
calculate:

.85,
.55). These nominations were used to

.88, Assistant a

.67, Defender a

.80, and Outsider a

(a)

Role Scores for each child: There were 21 items or behaviours on the PRS (e.g. ‘gets others to join
in  bullying’  and  ‘isn’t  usually  there,  stays  away’).  A  nomination  for  ‘sometimes’  showing  a
behaviour was scored as one, and ‘often’ was scored as two. The number of nominations within a
role was then divided by the number of nominators and multiplied by 100. The highest possible
‘role score’ for each role was therefore 200, indicating  that the child and each of their same sex
classmates  nominated them as ‘often’ showing each behaviour within that role.

(b) A Participant Role for each child on the basis of their highest role score: The exception was that a
child was assigned to the ‘Victim’ role if 30% or more of their classmates nominated them for the
‘Gets  bullied’  behavioural  description,  regardless  of  other  role  scores  (as  in  Salmivalli  et  al.,
1996).

Assessment of social cognition. Children were read 11 short stories designed to test understanding of mental
states or emotions. Summaries of the stories can be found in the Appendix: two full examples are shown
below.

Social cognition and bullying

439

Cognitive story: Double bluff (Happé, 1994):

During the war, the Red army captured a member of the Blue army. They want him to tell them
where his army’s tanks are; they know they are either by the sea or in the mountains. They know that
the prisoner will not want to tell them, he will want to save his army, and so he will certainly lie to
them. The prisoner is very brave and very clever, he will not let them nd his tanks. The tanks are
really in the mountains. Now when the other side asks him where his tanks are, he says, ‘They are in
the mountains.’

Control question: Is it true what the prisoner said?

Where will the other army look for his tanks?
Why did the prisoner say what he said?

Emotion story (Sutton, unpublished):

Mike wants to go out with his friends, but he has a really bad tummy ache. He knows that if his Mum
notices he is ill, she won’t let him go out to play. Mike goes downstairs and asks his Mum, ‘Can I go
out to play please?’

Control question: Which picture shows how Mike really feels?

Which picture shows how Mike will look when he talks to his Mum?

In addition to the control question based on the content of the story, answers to the questions at the end
of these  stories  assessing  understanding  of  mental  states  were scored  as  0 (fail),  one  (pass  but without
reference  to  a mental  state  or  belief),  or  two  (pass  including  reference  to a  mental  state  or belief).  For
example, an answer to the double bluff story above rated as two may have been ‘They will look by the sea
because they think that the prisoner is lying to them’. For the emotion story, a child scoring two would
have selected  either of the bottom two pictures  (see Fig. 1) (neutral or happy), indicating that he or she
recognized that the boy would try not to show his real feelings, along with a justication referencing the
mum’s mental states (e.g. ‘He’ll try to look happy so that his Mum doesn’t know that he’s ill’). Inter-rater
reliability  assessment  of  responses  to  the  stories  produced  an  alpha  coefcient  of  .87,  indicating  good
agreement.

The stories were also given to 21 independent raters to determine whether an understanding of emotions
was  crucial  in order  to answer  the  question  at  the end.  Majority  opinion  supported  the  view that  this
understanding was not crucial for the rst four stories (mean agreement 79%), but was for the remaining
seven (mean agreement 92%). On the basis of this, each child gained a cognitive score based on the rst four
stories (maximum eight), an emotion score based on the others (maximum 14), and total social cognition score
(maximum 22).

Assessment of type of bullying and motivation to bully. Teachers completed short questionnaires for each child
who scored above the average ‘Bully’ role score for their school class and gender (N = 67). Questions were
on a three-point scale of ‘never’, ‘sometimes’, and ‘often’, covering:

(a)
(b)
(c)

physical bullying: ‘Direct physical, e.g. hitting and kicking’;
verbal bullying: ‘Name calling’ and ‘teasing/ridiculing’; and
indirect bullying: ‘Excluding from social groups or activities’ and ‘spreading lies or rumours about
the victim’.

From  this  sample,  a  sub-sample  (N = 42)  were  taken  who  the  class  teachers  agreed  were  involved  in
bullying others more than average for their class/gender. This was to ensure that teachers were only rating
bullying of which they were aware.

Procedure

After obtaining  both parental  and individual  consent,  children  were tested  individually  away from  the
classroom, whenever possible in a quiet room. There were four sessions with each child: the BPVS, six of

440

J. Sutton et al.

the social cognition stories, the PRS interview (see Sutton & Smith, 1999, for full details of procedure), and
nally the remaining ve stories.

Results

Results  are  presented  using  the  categorical  measure  of  ‘Participant  Role’  to  compare
group means in social cognition, and the continuous measure of ‘Role Scores’ to test for
correlations between social cognition and the extent of different types of behaviour in the
whole sample.

Figure 1. Social cognition story responses

Social cognition and bullying

441

Participant Roles and characteristics

The distribution of the 193 children across the six Participant Roles is shown in Table 1.
There was no signicant association between sex and Participant Role (x 2(5) = 8.22, ns).
There  were  no  signicant  differences  between  roles  in  terms  of  verbal  ability
(F(5,187) = .38,  ns),  but  a  signicant  main  effect  of  role  on  age  was  found
(F(5,187) = 2.21, p <  .05). Follow-up t-tests showed that Reinforcers were signicantly
younger than  both Outsiders  (t(34) = 2 2.62, p <  .05)  and  Victims  (t(48) = 2 2.28,
p <  .05). To exercise caution, both age and verbal ability were controlled for in further
analyses.

Table 1. Numbers and participant characteristics  of each role

Number in each

% of total
sample by

gender

Participant Role

Bully
Reinforcer
Assistant
Defender
Outsider
Victim

role (% of
sample)

25 (13.0)
15 (7.8)
12 (6.2)
85 (44.0)
21 (10.9)
35 (18.1)

Boys

Girls

Age (months)

Mean (SD)

11.0
8.8
6.6
36.3
12.1
25.3

14.7
6.9
5.9
51.0
9.8
11.8

108  (9)
103  (8)
107  (8)
106  (9)
110  (9)
110 (10)

Verbal ability
(BPVS score)
Mean (SD)

91 (14)
92 (19)
90 (15)
95 (17)
95 (22)
93 (18)

Participant Roles and social cognition

From a total of 2123 responses (11 stories each for 193 children), there were 40 cases (less
than 2% of the total number of responses) when a child got a control question wrong. In
all cases the question was repeated and was then answered correctly. Errors also did not
appear to be clustered in any particular Participant Role group: 18 Defenders, 6 Victims,
5 Bullies, 2 Outsiders, 2 Assistants and 1 Reinforcer failed a control question, gures in
line with the differences in the sizes of the groups. For these reasons, control questions are
excluded from further analysis.

Table 2 shows the mean percentage of correct  responses over cognitive and emotion
stories,  and  overall  social  cognition  performance  for  the  six  participant  groups.  As  a
group, Bullies score higher on total social cognition score than any other group. A one-
way analysis of covariance was performed to investigate the effect of Participant Role on
total social cognition score. The cell-size approach was chosen for dealing with unequal N,
as the sample sizes represented observed different numbers in the Participant Roles (see
Tabachnick & Fidell, 1996). Age and verbal ability were entered as covariates. There was
a signicant effect  of Participant Role on total social cognition score (F(5,192) = 2.29,
p <  .05).

As there were only two a priori comparisons, standard follow-up t-test were used with
to control the familywise error rate. These supported the

a more conservative level of a

442

J. Sutton et al.

Table 2. Participant Role and mean percentage social cognition scores

Participant Roles

Mean % cognitive

Mean % emotion

score (SD)

score (SD)

(For whole sample)
Bully
Reinforcer
Assistant
Defender
Outsider
Victim

40.09 (23.59)
48.00 (23.57)
35.00 (20.70)
38.54 (27.93)
38.53 (20.70)
45.83 (26.61)
37.50 (27.45)

39.56 (13.85)
44.29 (11.48)
32.38 (17.68)
37.50 (12.97)
39.41 (12.93)
42.18 (15.47)
38.78 (14.42)

Mean % total
social cognition

score (SD)

39.59 (14.74)
45.64 (13.60)
33.64 (16.99)
37.88 (14.29)
38.98 (12.01)
43.51 (18.16)
37.53 (17.37)

hypotheses predicting social cognition differences between individual roles. Bullies score
signicantly  higher than Victims  (hypothesis a:  t(58) = 1.94, p = .025). Bullies  score
signicantly higher than the Follower group (hypothesis b: t(50) = 2.50, p <  .01). Post
hoc
t-tests  also  revealed  that  Bullies  score  signicantly  higher  than  Defenders
(t(108) = 2.36, p <  .05), but not signicantly higher than Outsiders (t(44) = .45, ns).
When cognitive score and emotion score are analysed separately, the only signicant
difference  between  groups  is  between  Bullies  and  Followers  on  the  emotion  score
(t(50) = 2.51, p <  .05).

Role scores and social cognition

Table 3 indicates two-tailed partial correlation coefcients (controlling for age and verbal
ability) between social cognition and actual extent of different types of behaviour, using
the whole sample.

Table 3. Partial correlations of individual role scores and social cognition

Social cognition
score

Cognitive
Emotion
Total score

Role score

Bully Reinforcer Assistant Defender Outsider Victim

.32***
.17*
.29***

.28***
.07
.21**

.19**
.01
.11

.01
.01
.01

.16*
.02
.10

.16*
.06
.15*

***p <  .001; ** p <  .01; * p <  .05

The  initiative-taking,  ringleader  behaviour  of  the  Bully  role  is  the  most  highly
correlated  with  total  social  cognition  score,  whereas  Victim  score  is  signicantly  neg-
atively correlated with total social cognition score. Role scores representing involvement
in  bullying (Bully,  Reinforcer  and  Assistant)  are  all  signicantly  positively  correlated
with cognitive score, whereas Defender role score is uncorrelated and the Outsider and

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Social cognition and bullying

443

Victim role scores are signicantly negatively correlated with cognitive score. Bully score
is also positively correlated with emotion score.

Type of bullying

Hypothesis C was not supported: a partial correlation between total social cognition score
and teacher-rated extent of indirect bullying (controlling for age, verbal ability and both
physical  and  verbal  bullying)  was  not  signicant  (r(36) = 2
.11,  one-tailed  p = .25).
In  an  equivalent  analysis  for  physical  bullying,  there  was  a  non-signicant  trend
(r(36) = 2
.24,  p = .14),  whereas  there  was  a  signicant  positive  partial  correlation
between verbal bullying and total social cognition score (r(36) = .43, p = .007).

Discussion

The results of this study clearly do not support an application of the social skills decit
model of aggression (Crick & Dodge, 1994) to children who bully others in school, or the
view  of  the  child  who  bullies  as  ‘oash’  and  stupid. There  was  a  signicant  effect  of
Participant Role on total social cognition score. Bullies scored signicantly higher on the
stories than all other groups in the bullying process (if it is accepted that Outsiders are not
involved). In support of hypotheses A and B, Bullies scored higher than both Victims and
Followers (Assistants plus Reinforcers).  An unexpected nding was that Bullies scored
higher than Followers on the emotion stories.

As  for  the  continuous measure  indicating  extent  of  the  different  behaviours  in  the
whole  sample,  role  scores  showing  involvement  in  bullying  others  were  positively
correlated  with total social  cognition score, whereas Outsider and Defender role scores
were not correlated and Victim score was negatively correlated with total social cognition
score.  Roles  involved  in bullying others were  signicantly  correlated  with a  cognitive
score, whereas Defender role score was not correlated and Outsider and Victim scores were
negatively  correlated  with  cognitive  score.  The  Bully  role  score  was  also  positively
correlated with the emotion score.

The positive correlation between teacher-rated verbal bullying and theory of mind was
not predicted. However, it may well be that the ability to understand the mental states
and emotions of others is a very adaptive one in teasing somebody effectively, or knowing
what  names  will  be  most  hurtful.  In  fact,  despite  the  negative  trend  found  between
teacher-rated physical bullying and theory of mind, it could be argued that even in purely
physical bullying, social cognition will still be of use in avoiding detection, or choosing
the most effective time and method for each situation in terms of maximizing the victim’s
vulnerability and minimizing chances of hurt to themselves (an idea similar to Bjorkqvist,
Österman & Kaukiainen’s (1992) ‘effect–danger ratio theory’). A single bully and his or
her chosen victim often appear to have a bizarre dyadic relationship (Randall, 1997), in
which there may be more consideration of mind than is immediately evident in the bully’s
behaviour.

However, the treatment of ‘bullies’ as a single category was a limitation of the study.
Further research is needed into the link between theory of mind and different  types of
bullying,  particularly  using  information  from  peers  on  the  methods  used.  This  may
overcome the problem of using teacher questionnaires (Ahmad & Smith, 1990), which

444

J. Sutton et al.

may go some way to explaining the absence of a link between indirect bullying and theory
of mind. There is evidence that teachers do include examples of indirect and direct forms
in their views of what bullying is (Boulton, 1997), and analyses in the present study were
limited to children about whom teachers agreed regarding their overall level of bullying.
However, there may still be an underestimation of the more covert and indirect methods.
A larger sample utilizing peer information on the type of bullying may possibly reveal a
bi-modal distribution of social cognition scores in bullies, with a socially  skilled group
and a group using predominantly physical methods performing less well on the stories.
In general, these results support the view presented that bullies may be at an advantage
if they possess theory of mind skills superior to those of their followers and their victims.
This study has identied their superior performance on a small set of stories, distinguish-
ing  between  cognitive  and  emotion  understanding. Three of  the  stories  were  Happé’s
(1994) stories: these have been shown to be sensitive enough to identify the mentalizing
decit in autistic participants who pass all standard false belief tasks, and for use in the
identication  of  the  neural  substrate  of  the  ability  to  mentalize  through  functional
neuroimaging (Fletcher et al., 1995). The remaining stories were similar in structure and
style, and the absence of ceiling level performance on the whole set of stories suggests they
are age-appropriate. However, a more ne-grained analysis using a wide range of tests and
samples may be required. Younger samples could attempt standard rst-order false belief
tasks (e.g. the Smarties test of Wimmer & Hartl, 1991), and the ‘reading the mind in the
eyes/face’ test (Baron-Cohen et al., 1996) would provide a more context and language-free
measure for a variety of age ranges.

Use  of  a  wider  range  of  social  cognition  tests  may  also  cast  some  light  on  the  less
expected  link  between  bullying  and  emotion  understanding. In  particular,  a  study  is
needed which distinguishes between emotion  recognition, emotion understanding and
empathy  in  children  who  bully.  Such  a  study  could  utilize  stories,  self-report  ques-
tionnaires of empathic concern (e.g. Bryant, 1982), and even physiological measures of
arousal. Do those bullies with a good theory of mind show this in all kinds of mentalizing,
or do they still  show decits in specic areas,  in particular  in theory of mind and false
beliefs involving the moral emotions not included in this study (e.g. guilt, love, remorse,
sympathy  and  shame)?  Do  they  understand these  emotions  (at  least  better  than  their
followers, who scored signicantly lower on emotion score) but just not share them, in
other words lack empathy? As noted earlier, children with conduct disorder most clearly
showed their mentalizing ability in the domain of anti-social behaviour (Happé & Frith,
1996), raising the possibility that this group has an intact but skewed theory of mind, or
a ‘theory of nasty minds’ (p. 395). This may be similar to Mealey’s (1995) emphasis on
‘cold cognition’ in sociopathy: a theory of mind formulated purely in instrumental terms,
without access to the empathic understanding that most people rely on. Blair et al. (1996)
found  evidence  for  a  dissociation  in  psychopathy  between  mentalizing  and  empathic
reaction.

It is possible, therefore, that a child who displays a heightened awareness of the feelings
of others (i.e.  high affective  perspective-taking  ability  as demonstrated by the positive
correlation in the present study between the Bully role score and the emotion score) but
also demonstrates an inability or unwillingness to share those feelings (i.e. low empathic
disposition) would be especially  manipulative  in his or her dealings with others (Hoff-
man,  1975;  Staub,  1979).  Randall  (1997)  notes  (but  fails  to  test  empirically)  that

Social cognition and bullying

445

proactive aggressors are ‘not easily upset emotionally . . . their emotions do not interfere
with their social cognition’ (p. 29). In a small sample of clinic-referred  children, Frick,
O’Brien,  Wootton  &  McBurnett  (1994)  identied  the  factor  of  ‘selsh,  callous,  and
remorseless use of others’ – familiar behaviour to victims of bullying. Bullies have been
reported to have higher levels of psychoticism (as measured by the Eysenck Personality
Questionnaire) than groups of victims and controls (Rigby & Slee, 1993), and psychoti-
cism does appear to be related to actual psychopathy (Hare, 1982). Longitudinal studies
are  needed  in  order  to  determine  how  many  bullies  actually  go  on  to  be  classied  as
psychopaths, and also how these bullies differ  from the less often studied successful  or
non-institutionalized psychopaths (Lynam, 1997).

Investigation of developmental trends like this, placing social cognition in bullying in
a lifespan perspective, may be a fruitful avenue for research. First, what type of families
might  these  socially  skilled  bullies  come  from?  Contributory  family  factors  in  the
development of social cognition could be integrated with existing knowledge of bullying
and  the  family,  possibly  investigating  the  links  between  ‘internal  working  models’
(Bowlby, 1988) and social cognition in bullying. For example,  the families  of children
who bully are often characterized by a lack of cohesion and an imbalance of power between
the parents (Bowers, Smith & Binney, 1992). Is this style of relationship internalized in
children, providing a model for a cold, manipulative way of thinking?

Second, where might these socially  skilled bullies end up? Social  cognition in adult
bullying  may  also  be  of  interest.  Victims  of  bullying  in  the  workplace  often  refer  to
managers  who cunningly manipulate  their  workers,  for  example  creating  ‘furtive  alli-
ances’  and using ‘entrapment’ (inviting  someone  to  commit  themselves  to a  course  of
action that is already known by the abuser to be awed; Thomas-Peter, 1997), and who
also manage to hide their behaviour from their superiors, passing it off as an ‘autocratic
style’. At an extreme level, the kind of social control sometimes seen in the workplace has
been likened to a cult (O’Reilly & Chatman, 1996), and there may be common elements
between  cult  leaders,  managers  and  10-year-old  bullies.  All  may  use  aggression  in  a
controlled,  efcient  form  in  an  environment  that  allows  it  to  ourish,  often  carefully
choosing  to  punish  those  who  are  not  valued  and  even  disliked  by  the  peer  group.
Jacobson (1992) also links early bullying behaviour with domestic violence, referring to
two distinct types: a  hot-headed, excessively  reactive  type, and a cool, calculating  and
proactive type where the battering is part of a general subjugation of the partner. This
latter type may be the adult version of a bully with good theory of mind skills.

One other area for further research within this lifespan perspective is the issue of the
directionality  of any link between bullying and theory of mind. While social cognition
skills may well assist an individual in bullying and manipulating others, it would also
seem possible that the experience of bullying itself may aid social cognitive development.
Indeed, the strategic planning and execution of deceptive acts has been found to facilitate
false-belief  understanding in 3-year olds (Hala & Chandler, 1996).

If certain types of bully are indeed found to have high level social cognition, this has
implications for intervention strategies. These bullies, being cold, manipulative masters
of a social situation, may resist traditional  anti-bullying policies  and curriculum work.
For example, the ‘No Blame’ approach (Maines & Robinson, 1991; Robinson & Maines,
1997) relies heavily on empathy on the part of the bully. Considerable success has been
reported using this method in terms of the reports of victims, but further research would

446

J. Sutton et al.

be  needed  to  determine  if  this  success  is  greatest  in  the  most  empathic  bullies,  and
whether the bully is also changed by the intervention. The empathic capacity of bullies is
particularly important: bullies performed well on the stories assessing understanding of
emotions, but if they do not actually share these emotions then intervention strategies
may inadvertently hone the skills of an emotionally manipulative bully. In particular, the
suggestion that  young bullies  should be  trained  in  theory  of  mind  abilities  (Randall,
1996) should be treated with caution. Children with conduct problems are a notoriously
heterogeneous group (Hinshaw, Lahey & Hart, 1993) and it is possible that no ‘blanket’
technique will  be completely  effective.  The popular stereotype  of bullies as lacking in
intelligence and social skills may be guiding anti-bullying policy away from individuals
who  do not t this picture,  and confronting  such individuals  may  depend on a  much
clearer understanding of the psychological weapons that some may use in causing distress
to others.

Alternatively, the focus could be shifted towards the psychological defences that could
be used by others: Bullies did not score signicantly higher in terms of social cognition
than  Outsiders.  Further research  is  needed  to  determine  what  prevents  these  children
from becoming involved in bullying, and also how their skills could be used in prosocial
ways to combat bullying. These children could be a useful resource in anti-bullying work,
as could Defenders. The Participant  Role approach could be used in combination with
sociometry, identifying popular Defenders and Outsiders and encouraging them to play
an active role in reducing bullying in the school. This could involve training them as peer
mediators or counsellors (Cowie & Sharp, 1996), or asking them to talk to Assistants and
Reinforcers about bullying and the effects it may have. Targeting the social support of the
Bully in this way may isolate them, and ultimately be more effective than attempting to
change the more entrenched behaviour of the Bully or the Victim.

Given the low scores of Victims and the negative correlations found between victim
score and social cognition, one possibility for interventions to keep in mind is a decit in
the social  cognition skills  of  victims  contributing to their  experience.  Does this  leave
them more open to manipulation by others? Interventions could possibly use theory of
mind training alongside assertiveness  training to give victims added skills in assessing
and responding to bullying, although clearly  such a course of action would need to be
carefully  monitored  and  empathy  also  emphasized  to  avoid  the  potential  problem  of
victims turning into bullies.

Further research  could also  investigate  in more  detail  how Crick & Dodge’s (1994)
social skills model may apply to children who bully, without assuming any decit. Bullies
may perceive and interpret social cues very accurately (the rst two stages), but may differ
in  goal  selection,  response  strategy  generation  and  response  decisions,  reecting  past
experiences and strategies which have worked rather than demonstrating an ‘error’. The
difference  may  lie  in  their  values,  or  the  content  or  the  cognitions,  rather  than  the
accuracy:  aggressive  children  attach  more  value  (or  importance)  to  the  rewarding
outcomes of aggression and less value to the negative outcomes than do non-aggressive
children (Boldizar, Perry & Perry, 1989). Further research is needed into this ‘costs and
benets’ analysis, and how this may be affected by both the cultural climate of the school
and the peer group. Deviant beliefs and values may stem from a deviant network of peers
(see Patterson, DeBaryshe & Ramsey, 1989), and the beliefs and values are then employed
in the organization of views of relationships, and instigation of behaviours. Investigation

Social cognition and bullying

447

into  the  interactions  between  beliefs,  values  and  cognitions  could  incorporate  social
psychological research on conformity, prejudice and leadership, asking what individual
and cultural expectations promote bullying behaviour. Askew (1989) has suggested that
schools which value competitiveness may tacitly encourage bullying, and Olweus (1993)
and  Smith  &  Sharp  (1994)  have  demonstrated  the  positive  effects  of  a  warm  and
participative school environment. This can presumably be extended to society as a whole:
if some bullies are indeed skilled in ‘psychological warfare’, it may be necessary to change
the battleground as well as the weapons used.

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to all the schools, teachers and pupils who participated in the study, to Francesca
Happé,  Simon  Baron-Cohen  and  his  co-authors  for  use  of  story  materials,  and  to  Jody  Dearden  for
illustrating  the emotion stories.

References

Ahmad, Y. & Smith, P. K. (1990). Behavioural measures: Bullying in schools. Newsletter of Association for

Child Psychology  and Psychiatry, 12, 26–27.

Askew, S. (1989). Aggressive behaviour in boys: To what extent is it institutionalized?  In D. P. Tattum

& D. A. Lane (Eds), Bullying in schools, pp. 59–71. Stoke-on-Trent: Trentham Books.

Baron-Cohen, S & Hammer, J. (1996). Is autism an extreme form of the male brain? Advances in Infancy

Research, 11, 193–217.

Baron-Cohen, S., O’Riordan, M., Stone, V., Jones, R. & Plaisted, K. (in press). Recognition of faux pas by
normally developing children and children with Asperger Syndrome. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders.

Baron-Cohen, S., Riviere, A., Cross, P., Fukushima, M., Bryant, C., Sotillo, M., Hadwin, J. & French, D.
(1996). Reading the mind in the face: A cross-cultural  and developmental  study. Visual Cognition, 3,
39–59.

Besag, V. (1989). Bullies and victims in schools. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Bjorkqvist,  K.,  Lagerspetz,  K.  M.  J.  &  Kaukiainen,  A.  (1992).  Do  girls  manipulate  and  boys  ght?
Developmental trends in regard to direct and indirect aggression. Aggressive Behaviour, 18, 117–127.
Bjorkqvist, K., Österman, K. & Kaukiainen, A. (1992). The development of direct and indirect aggressive
strategies in males and females. In K. Bjorkqvist & P. Niemela (Eds), Of mice and women: Aspects of female
aggression, pp. 51–64. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Blair, R. J. R., Sellars, C., Strickland, I., Clark, F., Williams, A. O., Smith, M. & Jones, L. (1996). Theory

of mind in the psychopath. Journal of Forensic Psychiatry, 7(1), 15–25.

Boldizar, J. P., Perry, D. G. & Perry, L. C. (1989). Outcome values and aggression. Child Development, 60,

571–579.

Boulton,  M.  J.  (1997).  Teachers’  views  on  bullying:  Denitions,  attitudes  and  ability  to  cope.  British

Journal of Educational Psychology, 67, 223–233.

Boulton, M. J. & Smith, P. K. (1994). Bully/victim problems in middle-school  children: Stability,  self-
perceived competence, peer perceptions and peer acceptance. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
12, 315–329.

Bowers, L., Smith, P. K. & Binney, V. (1992). Cohesion and power in the families of children involved in

bully/victim problems at school. Journal of Family Therapy, 14, 371–387.

Bowlby, J. (1988). A secure base: Clinical applications  of attachment theory. London: Routledge.
Bryant,  B.  K.  (1982).  An  index  of  empathy  for  children  and  adolescents.  Child  Development,  53,

413–425.

Cowie, H. & Sharp, S. (1996). Peer counselling  in school: A time to listen. London: David Fulton.
Crick,  N.  R.  &  Dodge,  K.  A.  (1994).  A  review  and  reformulation  of  social  information-processing

mechanisms in children’s social adjustment.  Psychological  Bulletin, 115, 74–101.

448

J. Sutton et al.

Crick, N. R. & Dodge, K. A. (1996). Social information processing mechanisms in reactive and proactive

aggression. Child Development, 67, 993–1002.

Crick, N. R. & Grotpeter,  J. K. (1995). Relational  aggression,  gender,  and social-psychological  adjust-

ment. Child Development, 66, 710–722.

Dodge, K. A. (1991). The structure and function of reactive and proactive aggression. In D. J. Pepler & K.
H.  Rubin  (Eds),  The  development  and  treatment  of  childhood  aggression,  pp.  201–218.  Hillsdale,  NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.

Dodge, K. A., Pettit,  G. S., McClaskey,  C. L. & Brown, M.  M.  (1986).  Social competence  in children.

Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 51(2), 1–85.

Dunn, L. M., Dunn, L. M., Whetton, C. & Pintilie,  D. (1982). British Picture Vocabulary Scale. Windsor:

NFER-NELSON.

Eslea, M. J. & Smith, P. K. (1998). The long-term effectiveness of anti-bullying work in primary schools.

Educational Research, 40, 203–218.

Feldman, E. & Dodge, K. A. (1987). Social information  processing and sociometric status: Sex, age, and

situational  effects.  Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 15, 211–277.

Fletcher, P. C., Happé, F., Frith, U., Baker, S. C., Dolan, R. J., Frackowiak, R. S. J. & Frith, C. D. (1995).
Other  minds  in  the  brain—a  functional  imaging  study  of  theory  of  mind  in  story  comprehension.
Cognition, 57(2), 109–128.

Frick, P. J., O’Brien, B. S., Wootton, J. M. & McBurnett, K. (1994). Psychopathy and conduct problems

in children. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 15, 211–277.

Gibbins,  C.  &  Craig,  W.  (1997).  Mapping  the  path  to  aggression:  Validation  of  a  social  cognitive  model  of
childhood. Paper presented at the biennial  meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development,
Washington DC, 3–6 April.

Guerra,  N.  G. & Slaby,  R. G. (1989).  Evaluative  factors  in social  problem  solving  by aggressive  boys.

Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 17, 177–289.

Hala,  S. & Chandler,  M.  (1996).  The role of strategic  planning in accessing  false-belief  understanding.

Child Development, 67, 2948–2966.

Happé, F. (1994). An advanced test of theory of mind: Understanding of story characters’ thoughts and
feelings by able autistic,  mentally handicapped, and normal children and adults. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 24(2), 129–154.

Happé, F. & Frith, U. (1996). Theory of mind and social impairment in children with conduct disorder.

British Journal of Developmental  Psychology, 14, 385–398.

Hare,  R.  D.  (1982).  Psychopathy  and  the  personality  dimensions  of  psychoticism,  extraversion  and

neuroticism.  Personality  and Individual Differences, 3, 35–42.

Hazler, R. J. (1996). Breaking the cycle of violence: Interventions for bullying and victimization. Washington, DC:

Accelerated Development.

Hinshaw, S. P., Lahey, B. B. & Hart, E. L. (1993). Issues of taxonomy and comorbidity in the development

of conduct disorder. Development and Psychopathology, 5, 31–49.

Hoffman, M. L. (1975). Developmental synthesis of affect and cognition and its implication for altruistic

motivation.  Developmental Psychology, 11, 607–622.

Jacobson, N. S. (1992). Behavioural couple therapy: A new beginning. Behaviour Therapy, 23, 493–506.
Kaukiainen, A., Bjorkqvist, K., Lagerspetz, K., Österman, K., Salmivalli,  C., Forsblom, S. & Ahlbom, A.
(1999). The relationships between social intelligence, empathy, and three types of aggression. Aggressive
Behaviour, 25(2), 81–89.

Keating, C. F. & Heltman, K. R. (1994). Dominance and deception in children and adults: Are leaders the

best misleaders?  Personality  and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20, 312–321.

Lagerspetz, K. M. J., Bjorkqvist, K., Berts, M. & King, E. (1982). Group aggression among schoolchildren

in three schools. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 23, 45–52.

Lynam, D. R. (1997). Pursuing the psychopath: Capturing the edgling psychopath in the nomological

net. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106(3), 425–438.

Maines,  B.  &  Robinson,  G.  (1991).  Don’t  beat  the  bullies!  Educational  Psychology  in  Practice,  7(3),

168–172.

Mealey,  L.  (1995).  The  sociobiology  of  sociopathy:  An  integrated  evolutionary  model.  Behavioural  and

Brain Sciences, 18, 523–599.

Olweus, D. (1978). Aggression in the schools:  Bullies and whipping boys. Washington, DC: Hemisphere.

Social cognition and bullying

449

Olweus, D. (1993). Bullying—what we know and what we can do. Oxford: Blackwells.
O’Reilly, C. A. & Chatman, J. A. (1996). Culture as social control: Corporations, cults and committment.

Research in Organizational  Behaviour, 18, 157–200.

Patterson,  G.  R.,  DeBaryshe,  B.  D.  &  Ramsey,  E.  (1989).  A  developmental  perspective  on  antisocial

behaviour. American Psychologist, 44, 329–335.

Pepler,  D. J.  & Craig, W. M.  (1995). A peek behind  the fence: Naturalistic  observations  of aggressive

children with remote audiovisual recording. Developmental Psychology, 31(4), 548–553.

Pepler,  D.,  Craig,  W.,  Zeigler,  S.  &  Charach,  A.  (1993).  A  school  based  anti-bullying  intervention:
Preliminary  evaluation. In D. Tattum (Ed.), Understanding and managing bullying, pp. 76–91. Oxford:
Heinemann Educational.

Premack, D. & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioural and Brain

Sciences, 1, 515–526.

Randall, P. (1996). Pre-school children: Experiences if being parented and the routes to bullying. In D.

Tattum & G. Herbert (Eds), Bullying: Home, school and community. London: David Fulton.

Randall, P. (1997). Adult bullying: Perpetrators  and victims. London: Routledge.
Rigby,  K.  &  Slee,  P.  T.  (1991).  Bullying  among  Australian  school  children:  Reported  behaviour  and

attitudes towards victims.  Journal of Social Psychology, 131, 615–627.

Rigby, K. & Slee, P. T. (1993). The relationship of Eysenck’s personality factors and self esteem to bully–

victim behaviour in Australian schoolboys. Personality  and Individual Differences, 14(2), 371–373.

Rivers, I. & Smith, P. K. (1994). Types of bullying behaviour and their correlates. Aggressive Behaviour, 20,

359–368.

Robinson, G. & Maines, B. (1997). Crying for help: The No Blame Approach to bullying. Bristol: Lucky Duck

Publishing.

Ross, D. M. (1996). Childhood bullying and teasing. Alexandria, VA: American Counselling Association.
Salmivalli, C., Lagerspetz, K., Bjorkqvist, K., Österman, K. & Kaukiainen, A. (1996). Bullying as a group
process: Participant roles and their relations to social status within the group. Aggressive Behaviour, 22,
1–15.

Smith, P. K. & Sharp, S. (1994). School bullying: Insights and perspectives . London: Routledge.
Sparrow, S., Balla, D. & Cicchetti, D. (1984). Vineland Adaptive Behaviour Scales (survey form). Circle Pines,

MN: American Guidance Services.

Staub,  E.  (1979).  Positive  social  behaviour  and  morality:  Socialization  and  development,  vol.  2.  New  York:

Academic Press.

Steinberg, M. D. & Dodge, K. A. (1983). Attributional bias in aggressive adolescent boys and girls. Journal

of Social and Clinical Psychology, 1, 312–321.

Sutton, J. & Smith, P. K. (1999). Bullying as a group process: An adaptation of the Participant Role Scale

appoach. Aggressive Behaviour, 25(2), 97–111.

Sutton, J., Smith, P. K. & Swettenham, J. (1999). Bullying and ‘theory of mind’: A critique of the ‘social

skills decit’ view of anti-social  behaviour. Social Development, 8(1), 117–134.

Tabachnick, B. & Fidell, L. S. (1996). Using multivariate  statistics, 3rd ed. New York: Harper Collins.
Taylor, M. (1996). A theory of mind perspective on social cognitive development. In R. Gelman & T. Kit-

Fong Au (Eds), Perceptual and cognitive development, pp. 283–329. London: Academic Press.

Thomas-Peter,  B.  A.  (1997).  Personal  standards  in  professional  relationships:  Limiting  interpersonal

harassment. Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 7, 233–239.

Whitney, I. & Smith, P. K. (1993). A survey of the nature and extent of bullying in junior/middle and

secondary schools. Educational Research, 35, 3–25.

Wimmer, H. & Hartl, M. (1991). Against the Cartesian view on mind: Young children’s difculty with

own false beliefs. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 9, 125–138.

Received 17 June 1998; revised version received  28 October 1998

450

J. Sutton et al.

Appendix

Summaries of social cognition stories

(1) Aaron attempts to deceive Ben by telling him to go to the school eld after school to play football,
rather than the usual venue of the park. Ben sees them going to the park. When Aaron’s friends
ask him where Ben is, he will think Ben has gone to the school eld because he doesn’t know Ben
knows they are at the park.

(2) When Chu leaves the room, Diane hides her picture,  unaware that Chu is watching her. When
Chu comes  back,  Diane will  think  she  will  look  for  her picture  where  she left  it,  because  she
doesn’t know that Chu knows where she put it.

(3) A prisoner uses a double bluff to attempt to trick his captors. They will look for his tanks in the

wrong place because they think he is lying to them.

(4) A burglar needlessly gives himself up when a policeman calls out to him to return a glove he has

dropped, because he thinks the policeman knows he is a burglar.

(5) Mrs Smith tells Jill she will have to drown the kittens if no-one buys them, because she knows that

if Jill thinks this is true she is more likely to buy one.

(6) Mike will put on a brave and happy face to his Mum when he wants to go out to play despite not

feeling well, because he knows that if his Mum knows he is ill she won’t let him go out.

(7) When Fiona  sits  on Gita’s model  at school,  she  thinks  she  will  be upset  or angry  because  she

doesn’t know Gita didn’t like the model and made a new one.

(8) Jane might feel happy for her friend when she wins a competition so that her friend doesn’t just

think she is sad or angry that she didn’t win herself.

(9) Claire is critical  of dinner ladies in front of Robert because she doesn’t know that his Mum is a

dinner lady.

(10) Two boys talk about another one, not knowing he is in the cubicles behind them.
(11) Uncle Tom says he doesn’t like apple pies, not knowing Kim has just made one for him.

Note. Stories 3, 4 and 5 are published in Happé (1994); 9, 10 and 11 are from Baron-Cohen, O’Riordan,
Stone, Jones & Plaisted (in press); the remainder are available from the rst author on request.

