Articles

A Longitudinal Study of Mother-Child
Relationships and Theory of Mind in 
the Preschool Period
Douglas K. Symons and Sharon E. Clark, Acadia University, Canada

Abstract

To investigate individual differences in theory of mind acquisition, this study exam-
ined whether different aspects of early mother-child relationships contributed to the
development of false belief understanding at the close of the preschool period. Forty-
six mother and child pairs were seen when children were two and again at ﬁve years
of age. At age two, home-based Q-sort observations of attachment security and mater-
nal sensitivity were made, and mothers completed a number of self-report measures
to create an aggregate of maternal emotional distress. At age ﬁve, attachment secu-
rity and maternal distress were reassessed, and false belief tasks were administered
that  were  based  on  unexpected  identities  and  locations  of  objects.  In  addition, 
attachment-relevant false belief tasks involving separation from caregivers were also
used,  which  children  found  signiﬁcantly  more  difﬁcult  than  tasks  involving  objects.
Age ﬁve security predicted object location task performance. Maternal sensitivity and
emotional distress at age two predicted later caregiver location task performance, even
controlling  for  age  ﬁve  measures.  These  results  support  a  growing  literature  on 
the  importance  of  relationship  processes  and  parenting  context  to  theory  of  mind
acquisition.

Keywords: Theory of mind; attachment; parental sensitivity; false belief

Considerable attention is being directed to the thesis that children’s understanding of
social events is inﬂuenced by their relationship histories with caregivers. It is adap-
tive for young children to understand the behavior of others, and Bowlby (1969/82)
initially  proposed  that  this  develops  in  infancy  within  a  goal-corrected  partnership
with a caregiver. An infant develops expectations that his or her caregiver will behave
and react to situations in speciﬁc ways based on a history of interactions with the care-
giver (Kaye, 1982; Vygotsky, 1986). Beyond infancy, Dunn (1991, 1995) has stressed
that the family context serves as the basis for children’s understanding of mental states
and behavior of others. In a similiar fashion, Fonagy and Target (1997) suggested that
the ‘development of children’s understanding of mental states is embedded within the
social world of the family’ (p. 681).

Correspondence  can  be  addressed  to  Dr.  Doug  Symons,  Psychology  Department,  Acadia  University,
Wolfville NS CANADA, B0P 1X0. E-mail: DOUG.SYMONS@ACADIAU.CA

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000. Published by Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and 350 Main Street, 
Malden, MA 02148, USA.

4 Douglas K. Symons and Sharon E. Clark

Theorists have examined the complex social and cognitive milieu that leads to the
sense of self and others that develops in the ﬁrst six years of life (Dunn, 1991; Fonagy,
Steele, Steele, & Holder, 1997; Stern, 1985; Sroufe, 1996). From a cognitive devel-
opment  perspective,  relationship  histories  may  contribute  to  individual  differences 
in theory of mind development and information-seeking behavior (Astington, 1993;
Baldwin & Moses, 1996; Barresi & Moore, 1996). And from a social development
perspective, working models of relationships and metacognitive development associ-
ated with secure base behavior may be fundamental consequents of early relationships
and  attachment  security  (Bretherton,  1985;  Main.  1991;  Main,  Kaplan,  &  Cassidy,
1985; Meins, 1997). Cognitive and social domains are therefore seen as increasingly
complementary.

The goal of the present study was to examine the hypothesis that various features
of early mother-child relationships in infancy contribute to the development of social
understanding  at  the  close  of  the  preschool  period  as  indicated  by  performance  on
theory of mind tasks. While there has been some attention to predictive models includ-
ing  attachment  security,  there  has  been  little  consideration  of  general  measures  of
parental sensitivity and emotional distress. Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, and Wall (1978)
proposed that parent-child attachment quality is based on the history of a caregiver’s
responses  to  an  infant’s  signals  for  proximity  and  contact.  Sensitive  caregiving  is
widely thought to be related to attachment security, and together, security and sensi-
tivity  therefore  reﬂect  important  individual  differences  in  relationship  quality  (see
Ainsworth et al., 1978; DeWolfe & Van IJzendoorn, 1997; Hinde & Stevenson-Hinde,
1988; Pederson & Moran, 1995). The concurrent and predictive relations of attach-
ment security, maternal sensitivity, and maternal emotional distress to a variety of false
belief tasks were therefore examined.

Social understanding in young children can be assessed using false belief tasks from
theory of mind literature. In these kinds of tasks, a situation is arranged so that a par-
ticipant’s  belief  about  a  situation  is  true  and  based  on  observable  consequences,
whereas  a  story-character’s  belief  is  false  relative  to  a  participant’s  (for  review,  see
Astington,  1993;  Gopnik,  1993).  If  a  participant  reports  that  the  other  will  act  on 
the basis of the false understanding, then they are assumed to have been able to rep-
resent the perspective of the other and attribute beliefs that do not match their own.
He or she is thus seen as successfully completing a false belief task. For example, in
a  standard  unintended  transfer  task  (e.g.,  Wimmer  &  Perner,  1983),  a  story-line  is
acted out in which a child-character places an object in a location, leaves for some
reason, a foil relocates the object to another location, and then the character returns
and  looks  for  the  object.  If  a  participant  directs  the  character  to  search  where  the 
object had been left, this is consistent with understanding that the character has beliefs
that differ from the participant’s. But if the search is directly to where the object actu-
ally  is,  no  such  distinction  is  drawn.  Normative  age-trends  for  false  belief  under-
standing  have  become  well  established  and  children  should  pass  tasks  as  early  as 
four years of age and certainly by age ﬁve (Frye, Zelazo, & Palfai, 1995; Gopnik &
Astington, 1988; Wellman, 1990), particularly when linguistic demands of the tasks
are minimised.

False belief tasks have story lines that typically focus on the identity or location of
an object, but objects should not activate attachment systems. Caregiver-ﬁgures are
not involved in these story lines, and relationship issues are not proximal to the task.
Performance on tasks, which incorporate caregivers, may be very different. In a recent
cross-sectional study of three, four, and ﬁve year-old children (Symons, McLaughlin,

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

Relationships and Theory of Mind

5

Moore, & Morine, 1997), the oldest children were found to exhibit false belief under-
standing for tasks involving the identity and location of objects. Tasks were also devel-
oped and administered to elicit secure-base behavior by incorporating separation from
a caregiver into an unintended transfer task (see Wimmer & Perner, 1983). The story-
line of the caregiver location task is analogous: the child character is with a parent,
the parent goes off to a particular location, the parent becomes relocated to another
location for some reason, and then the child-character seeks the caregiver. Both objects
and caregivers may be desired items within these kinds of tasks, but proximity-seeking,
emotional security, and secure-base behavior are involved when a character is reunited
with a caregiver they have been separated from, as opposed to a character ‘ﬁnding’
an object that has gone missing. In Symons et al. (1997), 5-year-old children did not
display false belief understanding for these analogous tasks where people instead of
objects were sought. This may be because the social component of the task interferes
with performance (as in Nguyen & Frye, 1999), and children may be confused by the
animacy (e.g., beliefs and intentions) of the sought-for item (Poulin-Dubois & Shultz,
1990; Gelman & Gottfried, 1996). Regardless, the potential for attachment security to
be related to false belief task performance might be enhanced if a task is used which
incorporates separation from a caregiver rather than an object.

Only  recently  have  researchers  begun  to  investigate  individual  differences  in  the
acquisition of a theory of mind (for example, Gopnik, 1997; Ruffman, 1997). There
is  some  evidence  that  the  number  of  siblings  (Jenkins  & Astington,  1996;  Perner,
Ruffman, & Leekham, 1994), and particularly older siblings (Ruffman, Perner, Naito,
Parkin,  &  Clements,  1998),  as  well  as  fantasy  and  pretense  in  play  (Astington  &
Jenkins, 1995; Taylor & Carlson, 1997) are related to false belief understanding. Pre-
sumably this is due to facilitative interactions between siblings or with parents who
explain the behavior of older siblings to younger children. This, in turn, may enhance
social understanding or metacognitive skill within play (Astington, 1993; Ruffman et
al.,  1998).  Dunn  and  co-workers  (Dunn,  Brown,  &  Beardsall,  1991;  Dunn,  Brown,
Slomkowski, Tesla, & Youngbade, 1991), for example, found that performance on false
belief tasks at 40 months was predicted by co-operative interactions between children
and siblings at 33 months. Children who passed tasks also had mothers who had pre-
viously been rated as controlling and intrusive during interactions with older siblings.
If  such  parental  behavior  included  intervening  with  an  older  child  to  explain  the
younger child’s thoughts and feelings, then mothers would be modelling attention to
mental states.

Cross-sectional data have also related features of social understanding to attachment
security.  Given  that  metacognition  reﬂects  social  understanding,  Moss,  Gosselin,
Parent, Rousseau, and Dumont (1997) showed that child metacognitive skills during a
short, lab-based, problem-solving task were associated with maternal Q-sort ratings of
attachment security. Fonagy, Redfern, and Charman (1997) found that false belief per-
formance was concurrently related to a representational measure of attachment secu-
rity in which a preschool-age child responded to pictures of separation experiences.
And  ﬁnally,  Laible  and  Thompson  (1998)  recently  found  that  attachment  security
assessed using a maternal Q-sort was related to children’s understanding of negative
emotional states in other children, but unrelated to positive emotional states.

Only recently have longitudinal studies examined these relations. First, Meins, Fer-
nyhough, Russell, and Clark-Carter (1998) assessed strange situation attachment secu-
rity when 33 children were approximately 12 months of age and followed this sample
until age ﬁve. Children who were secure relative to insecurely attached children were

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

6 Douglas K. Symons and Sharon E. Clark

more likely to incorporate an experimenter’s pretense suggestions into their symbolic
play at 31 months, have mothers who focused on their child’s mental characteristics
at 37 months, and correctly answer an unexpected transfer false belief task at age four.
Maternal  sensitivity  to  cognitive  skill-level  within  a  teaching  task  was  also  related 
to false belief task performance (Meins, 1997). Second, Fonagy, Steele, Steele, and
Holder (1998) used the strange situation to assess attachment security of 92 infants at
age  one  with  their  mothers  and  at  18  months  with  their  fathers. At  ﬁve  years,  they
completed a strange situation procedure modiﬁed for use with older children. They
also administered a cognitive emotion task in which participants had to predict a char-
acter’s emotion on the basis of their false belief, which was more complex than a stand-
ard  false  belief  task  because  of  the  affective-interpersonal  component.  Although
concurrent infant-mother attachment security was not associated with performance on
the cognitive emotion task, security in infancy was associated with passing the task.
In addition, both antecedent and concurrent infant-father security was associated with
passing this task.

Longitudinal data between early social relationships and later theory of mind indices
are restricted to measures of attachment security from strange situation assessments,
and only traditional object-oriented false belief tasks have been used. The current study
was  designed  as  a  prospective  study  in  which  home-based  observations  of  Q-sort
attachment security ratings at age two and ﬁve were used to predict false belief per-
formance on a range of tasks at age ﬁve. The advantage of a Q-sort measure is that it
provides a quantitative measure and lends itself to regression models. The Attachment
Security Q-sort (Waters, Vaughn, Posada, & Kondo-Ikemura, 1995) has the additional
advantage  of  being  used  with  children  beyond  infancy  (Symons,  Clark,  Isaksen,  &
Marshall, 1998), thereby allowing a concurrent assessment of attachment security at
age  ﬁve  using  the  same  index.  Maternal  sensitivity  is  important  to  consider  given 
theoretical links to Vygotsky’s ‘zone of proximal development’ (see Moss et al., 1997).
In this approach, a sensitive parent who sees his or her infant as an intentional being
may, in turn, enhance mentalising capacity of that young child (Fonagy & Target, 1997;
Fonagy et al., 1998; Meins, 1997). Studies have also only examined maternal sensi-
tivity within speciﬁc kinds of structured interactions, whereas the current study exam-
ined  sensitivity  as  a  general  home-based  construct,  as  originally  envisioned  by
Ainsworth. A maternal sensitivity Q-sort measure from age two was therefore included
in  predictive  models  as  an  additional  index  of  the  mother-child  relationship.  It  was
hypothesised  that  attachment  security  and  maternal  sensitivity  at  age  two  would
predict theory of mind acquisition at age ﬁve.

A mother’s capacity to serve as a secure base is affected by her own parental stress
level  and  degree  of  attention  given  to  the  child.  This  was  initially  suggested  by
Ainsworth et al. (1978) who discussed the ‘emotional availability’ of a mother who is
sensitive (see also Crnic & Greenberg, 1990; Dix, 1991; Pederson et al., 1990). Par-
enting  models  (e.g.,  Belsky,  1984;  Crnic  &  Greenberg,  1990;  Dix,  1991)  have  also
emphasised  how  early  parent-child  relationships  can  be  negatively  impacted  by  the
emotional distress of a parent (e.g., Downey & Coyne, 1990; Gelfand & Teti, 1990;
Van IJzendoorn, Goldberg, Kroonenberg, & Frenkel, 1992). Sensitive parenting is a
high demand activity that requires appropriate awareness, interpretation, and response
to infant signals in a prompt fashion, so parents high in negative affectivity may be
less sensitive. Watson and Clark (1984) deﬁned negative affectivity as the tendency to
experience aversive emotional states such as generalised anxiety and depression. It is
possible that the controlling and intrusive parental behavior observed by Dunn et al.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

Relationships and Theory of Mind

7

(1991)  was  related  to  negative  affectivity  in  parenting,  even  though  this  behavior 
was directed at siblings and not the participants themselves. Overall, however, little 
is  known  about  how  parental  emotional  distress  may  relate  to  theory  of  mind  in 
children. Antecedent and concurrent distress were thus added to predictive models in
the current study, but no directional predictions were made.

Social understanding was examined using a series of false belief tasks. In six tasks,
the  identity  of  objects  or  contents  of  containers  were  not  as  they  initially  appeared
(‘Smarties task’; Gopnik & Astington, 1988). There were two tasks in which objects
were unexpectedly transferred from one location to another (‘Maxi task’; Wimmer &
Perner,  1983).  In  addition,  there  were  three  tasks  involving  separation  from  a  care-
giver  due  to  unexpected  relocation.  Given  previous  research  (e.g.,  Symons  et  al.,
1997), it was expected that performance on all of these kinds of tasks would be above
chance for 5-year-old children, but there would still be enough variability to examine
individual difference questions. Given that caregiver location tasks had embedded rela-
tionship constructs and were potentially more emotionally salient (as in Fonagy et al.,
1998), it was hypothesised that performance would be lower relative to tasks involv-
ing objects. Predictive models were also expected to be better for caregiver location
tasks because of relevance to relationship processes. Finally, it was felt that a verbal
IQ control measure did not have to be included because the tasks were acted out with
age-appropriate play materials and no verbal responses were required of participants.
Given age effects on theory of mind indices, age at the time of assessment of false
beliefs was taken into consideration.

Method

Participants

Forty-six mothers and their children (20 girls, 26 boys) followed since birth (Symons
&  McLeod,  1994)  were  observed  when  children  were  two  years  of  age  (M = 25.1
months, SD = 1.09, range = 23 to 28), and again when children were around ﬁve years
of  age  (M = 69.5  months,  SD = 4.08).  Most  children  ranged  in  age  from  64  to  74
months at the latter age. However, due to scheduling problems, three children were
outside this age range, and so the complete range was actually 54 to 81 months. Of
the 57 mother-child pairs seen at age two, we were able to re-contact 48 of these by
telephone,  and  only  two  (4%)  declined  participation  due  to  other  demands  on 
their time.

Eighteen (39%) of the children were ﬁrst born. At age ﬁve, three children had no
siblings,  19  had  one  sibling,  and  24  had  more  than  one  sibling. Thirty-three  (72%)
children had experienced the birth of at least one younger sibling between the age two
and ﬁve contacts. Infant medical histories were unremarkable.

Forty-one (89%) of the mothers remained married to or living with the child’s father
by age ﬁve and the other ﬁve headed single-parent families. The numbers of mothers
in  part-time  and  full-time  employment  using  20  hours/week  as  a  cut-off  were  20 
and 26 at both ages. Mothers and fathers had a wide SES range at age ﬁve (Blishen,
Carroll,  &  Moore,  1987),  and  a  family  SES  measure  was  calculated  as  an  average 
of SES scores in dual-earner families and as the single score in single-earner families
(M = 44.3,  SD = 13.7,  Range  23.4  to  78.3).  For  three  families,  neither  parent 
was  employed,  so  a  Blishen  score  could  not  be  assigned.  Mothers  were  28  to  42 
(M = 33.72) years of age and fathers’ ages ranged from 28 to 49 (M = 35.69). The

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

8 Douglas K. Symons and Sharon E. Clark

participants  all  spoke  English  as  a  ﬁrst  language  and  were  exclusively  Caucasian,
which is typical of the population base of this region of rural Nova Scotia.

Procedure and Measures

Two 1.5- to 2-hour visits were conducted with each mother-infant pair at both ages.
The two visits at each age were scheduled to occur within two weeks of one another.
At  age  two,  they  consisted  of  a  laboratory  and  home  visit  (see  Symons,  1998-b;
Symons, Noiles, & Richards, in press), and at age ﬁve, this consisted of two home
visits. On six (13%) occasions at age two and nine (19.6%) occasions at age ﬁve, a
single 3-hour home visit was used to collect data due to distant travel. Home visits
occurred  at  a  time  when  there  would  be  minimal  distraction  from  other  family
members.

Maternal emotional distress. A number of self-report measures were completed by
mothers  to  assess  maternal  depressive  symptoms,  state  and  trait  anxiety,  parental
stress, coping behavior, and social support at each age. All mothers completed all of
these measures at age two. Time constraints due to new occupations, family stressors,
and health reasons, however, resulted in only 41 mothers completing all of these ques-
tionnaires at age ﬁve. Symons (1998-a) has shown that maternal report measures of
depression,  coping,  social  support,  and  anxiety  are  all  interrelated  in  a  predictable
fashion, and can be factor-analysed into an aggregate of ‘maternal emotional distress’.
Given the importance of trait anxiety reports to this factor, this construct may also be
representative of negative affectivity in parenting (Watson & Clark, 1984). Measures
were as follows:

The Centre for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CES-D; Radloff, 1977)
is  a  20-item  self-report  scale  designed  to  assess  depressive  symptomatology  in  the
general population in which scores range from 0 to 60. Items assess different symp-
toms of depression such as appetite loss, depressed mood, sleep disturbances, and dif-
ﬁculty in concentrating according to how the individual felt during the week prior to
the assessment. The mean CES-D scores at both age two (M = 7.47, SD = 6.01, Range
= 0 to 25) and ﬁve (M = 5.67, SD = 7.34, Range = 0 to 32) were within the normal
range. The number of women scoring in the clinical elevation range of 16 or above
was 6 and 3 for age two and ﬁve, respectively, and the correlation of scores between
the ages was r (42) = .47, p < .01.

Situational  and  dispositional  anxiety  were  assessed  using  the  State-Trait Anxiety
Inventory-Form Y (STAI; Spielberger, Gorsuch, Lushene, Vagg, & Jacobs, 1983) which
incorporates 20 items descriptive of current and dispositional intensity of anxiety. This
measure has been widely used to assess state and trait anxiety, and the authors report
good  internal  consistency,  reliability,  and  validity  information  on  the  measure. The
trait subscale has been described as the best single measure of negative affectivity in
adults (Watson & Clark, 1984).

Stress  more  speciﬁc  to  the  parent-child  relationship  was  assessed  using  the 
Parenting  Stress  Index-Form  6 (PSI;  Abidin,  1990).  The  Parent  Domain  examines 
the  parental  characteristics  and  family  context  variables  thought  to  have  an  impact 
on  competent  parental  functioning. The  Child  Domain  examines  a  child’s  tempera-
ment characteristics and parents’ perception of the impact that a given temperament
has  on  them,  and  scores  are  reported  in  percentiles.  The  correlations  between  the 
two ages were signiﬁcant for both the child and parent domains, both r’s (42) = .64,
p < .001.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

Relationships and Theory of Mind

9

Coping resources were assessed using the Coping Inventory for Stressful Situations
(CISS; Endler & Parker, 1991), which is a self-report scale of 48-items of how people
react to various difﬁcult, stressful, or upsetting situations. Items are evenly distributed
amongst  three  coping  styles  that  are  task-,  emotion-,  and  avoidance-oriented.  Only
task-oriented and emotion-oriented coping were used because of their close concep-
tual  relationship  to  emotional  adjustment.  The  authors  describe  how  anxious  and
depressed  samples  usually  score  high  in  emotion-oriented  coping  (e.g.,  get  angry,
become  very  upset)  and  low  in  task-oriented  coping  with  stress  (e.g.,  schedule  my
time better, think about how I have solved similar problems). All items were rated on
a  ﬁve-point  Likert  scale  ranging  from  ‘not  at  all’ to  ‘very  much’,  and  scores  are
reported as T-scores.

To  further  assess  resources,  social  support  was  assessed  from  a  rating  scale 
of  Crockenberg  and  Litman  (1991).  Using  a  10-point  scale  ranging  from  1  (about 
as  bad  as  it  can  get)  to  10  (perfect),  mothers  rated  their  degree  of  satisfaction 
with three aspects of social support (i.e., childcare, emotional, and household). These
were averaged to provide a single score out of 10 at age two (M = 7.52, SD = 1.77,
Range = 3 to 10) and ﬁve (M = 7.65, SD = 1.62, Range = 2 to 10). Adequate internal
consistencies  for  this  measure  were  found  in  the  current  study  (age  two  and  ﬁve 
alphas  = .73  and  .71,  respectively),  as  well  as  by  Crockenberg  and  Litman  (1991)
(alpha = .78).

Observations of attachment security and maternal sensitivity. Attachment security
was  assessed  at  age  two  and  ﬁve,  and  maternal  sensitivity  was  assessed  at  age  two
using  two  complementary  Q-sort  measures  completed  by  two  observers  trained
according  to  the  procedures  outlined  in  Pederson  and  Moran  (1995)  and  consistent
with the AQS Advisor (Waters, 1997). The Attachment Behavior Q-set (AQS; Waters,
1987; Waters et al., 1995) is a naturalistic assessment technique used to evaluate the
attachment relationship between a mother and her infant. The AQS is a 90-item set of
cards referring to speciﬁc infant secure-base and related behaviors as well as relevant
contexts, with opposite behaviors being deﬁned in italics if needed. Observers place
cards in nine piles of ten ranging from most unlike to most like the observed child,
and the resulting attachment score is the correlation between the sort descriptive of
the  observed  child’s  behaviors  and  a  criterion  sort  of  the  prototypically  securely
attached infant. Interobserver reliability was very high at both age two, r (45) = .84,
p < .001, and age ﬁve, r (45) = .74, p < .001. In preliminary analyses, we found mod-
erate stability between average AQS scores at the two ages, r (45) = .44, p < .01, and
high  reliability  for  the  relative  judgements  on  speciﬁc  behaviors  at  each  age  (for
further details see Symons et al., 1998).

The  Maternal  Behavior  Q-sort (MBQ; Pederson et al., 1990)  is an observational
measure modelled after the AQS and designed to determine the parental sensitivity of
a mother toward her child. The MBQ has high concurrent validity with the AQS and
other measures of dyadic functioning (see also Pederson & Moran, 1995). Using 90
descriptive cards, a measure is taken of a mother’s ability to perceive, identify, and
respond consistently and accurately to signals from her child. Sorting procedures of
the  MBQ  are  similar  to  those  of  the AQS. The  MBQ  items  consist  of  referents  to
maternal behavior that are indicative of either high or low levels of sensitive parent-
ing, whereas the AQS referents are of infant behaviors more or less indicative of secure
base behavior. The MBQ sensitivity score is the correlation between the sort descrip-
tive  of  the  observed  mother’s  behavior  and  the  criterion  sort  of  the  prototypically 
sensitive  mother  (see  Pederson  et  al.,  1990).  In  the  current  data,  there  was  high 

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

10 Douglas K. Symons and Sharon E. Clark

interobserver  agreement  between  the  MBQ  sorts  of  the  two  observers  at  age  two, 
r (45) = .80, p < .0001.

Observations  of  attachment  security  and  sensitivity  at  age  two  were  completed 
independently  and  blind  to  the  questionnaire  data  by  both  observers.  The  order 
that  the  sorts  were  completed  was  randomly  determined  for  each  observer. At  age 
ﬁve, both observers completed the AQS, but the MBQ was not completed because age
two  is  the  upper-end  of  its  age-range.  During  each  home  visit,  both  researchers
attended to the infant and mother, particularly during naturally occurring separations
and reunions, as well as when the child was competing for his or her mother’s atten-
tion. Q-sorts were completed within two days of the completion of the last home visit
at each respective age.

At age two, the ﬁrst visit included an employment interview administered by one
researcher, with the other researcher serving as a second observer. At age ﬁve, during
the  ﬁrst  visit  an  employment  interview  was  again  administered  by  one  researcher,
while the other conducted false belief tasks in a separate area of the home such as the
kitchen. On the second visit, the mothers and their children were asked to play a game
(‘Guess Who’ © Hasbro Co.) in order to give them a structured play task in addition
to whatever unstructured interactions they had planned on their own. Finally, a small
number of supplemental questions were used at each age to gather information about
behavior that could not be observed.

At age two, both observers were blind to false belief performance, but at age ﬁve,
only one observer was blind. At age two, ﬁve different observers were involved in data
collection.  At  age  ﬁve,  four  researchers  shared  the  observation  duties,  and  in  ﬁve
instances, an observer saw the same dyad at age ﬁve and age two. In this small number
of cases, however, this person did not administer the false belief tasks, remained blind
to that data, and reported no recollection of the behavioral dynamics of the dyad they
had seen three years previous.

Attachment security at age ﬁve was the AQS score from the sort of the observer
blind to false belief performance. At age two, independence between attachment secu-
rity and maternal sensitivity sorts was obtained by using the AQS sort of a randomly
determined observer, and the MBQ sort of the other observer for that particular dyad.
For  all  subsequent  data  analyses,  Fisher  r  to  z transformations  were  conducted  on
scores for each age. This is appropriate when a dependent variable is a correlation sta-
tistic, and in addition, this provides correction to the negative skew of the Q-sort dis-
tribution that is typically found (see Waters et al., 1995; Waters & Deane, 1985). There
were wide ranges of scores for attachment security at age ﬁve (M = .50,  SD = .23,
Range = -.15 to .93) and two (M = .42, SD = .27, Range = -.13 to 1.07), and mater-
nal sensitivity at age two (M = .76, SD = .36, Range = -.07 to 1.33).

False belief tasks. Tasks were used to assess false beliefs children may hold for the
identity of objects, the location of objects, and the location of caregivers. The three
sets of tasks were administered in a randomly determined order. Six Object Identity
tasks were similar to appearance-reality tasks of Gopnik and Astington (1988; see also
Flavell, Greene, & Flavell, 1986). In these well-known types of false belief tasks, chil-
dren were sequentially given six objects whose real identity or logical contents of a
container differed from their apparent identities or actual contents. There was also a
preceding  warm-up  item  for  task  familiarisation.  Items  were  as  follows:  (1)  an  egg
carton  containing  forks  and  not  eggs;  (2)  a  Smarties  box  containing  rocks  and  not
Smarties; (3) a candle that looks like an apple; (4) an eraser that looks like a magic
marker; (5) a milk carton that contains water; and, (6) a ﬂashlight that looks like a

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

Relationships and Theory of Mind

11

pen.  In  each  item,  a  child  was  shown  an  object  (e.g.,  a  box  of  smarties)  and  asked
what they thought it was or what it contained before they were allowed to discover its
real identity or contents (e.g., the box really contains rocks). Participants were asked
whether another child could hold a different representation of the object than them-
selves to assess false belief (e.g., ‘Another boy/girl hasn’t seen this before, what will
he/she think it is when he/she ﬁrst sees it, Smarties or rocks?’). Children were also
asked what their previous beliefs were to assess representational change (e.g., ‘What
did you think was in the box before we opened it, rocks or Smarties?’). Protocols for
these and other tasks are available from the ﬁrst author.

Children correctly identiﬁed the object when it was initially presented on a small
number of occasions (29/276 = 10%). One child correctly guessed that the Smarties
box  contained  rocks,  four  children  correctly  knew  water  was  in  the  milk  container,
one recognised the eraser, six identiﬁed the apple as a candle, and seventeen recog-
nised the ﬂashlight. These items were omitted. False belief scores across the remain-
ing eligible items had high internal consistency according to Cronbach’s alpha = .77.
The six object identity tasks were administered to each child in a random order, and
the summary score consisted of the average number of eligible items that were passed,
i.e., were consistent with a correct understanding of false belief.

Two Object Location tasks were developed from Wimmer and Perner’s (1983) unex-
pected transfer task, also known as the ‘Maxi task’ (Moses & Flavell, 1990; Perner,
Leekam, & Wimmer, 1987). In the two tasks acted out with DUPLO and LEGO mate-
rials, a gender- and age-matched central character (e.g., ‘Sara’) hides an object (e.g.,
a toy radio) and leaves the room, a foil (e.g., a monkey) relocates the object, and the
character returns to the scene. The settings for the two stories were a bedroom- and
kitchen-setting. The children were then given the character and asked the following
sequence of questions (taken from the kitchen-setting task): (1) Show me what Sara
will do next. (false belief question: does Sara search where the toy was left or where
it actually is?); (2) Where will Sara look for the toy radio? (back up false belief ques-
tion: necessary only if Sara did not look for the toy radio after the open ended prompt);
? (emotional justiﬁca-
(3) Show me how Sara feels right now. Why does Sara feel 
tion control question: is emotion related to salient features of the task?); (4) Where
did Sara leave her radio? (ﬁrst memory control question); (5) Where did the monkey
put the radio? (second memory control question); and (6) Was Sara in the room or
outside when the monkey switched the toys? (third memory control question). A face-
board was available for question three, and children identiﬁed the emotion by point-
ing to one of six photographs of a same-age child modelling a happy, sad, surprised,
neutral, scared, and angry face.

Those children that had the character search where they had originally left the object
were  scored  to  have  a  correct  understanding  of  false  belief,  and  those  who  looked
where the object actually was, were not. An object location item was scored as a pass
only if participants also answered three of the four control questions properly to control
for tasks passed by chance. In each object location task, objects could be hidden from
view in a variety of small drawers and boxes. Two distinct locations on either side of
each setting were used and locations of objects were counterbalanced. Although per-
formance on these tasks was unrelated (f = .20, p = .20), this may have been due to
a  low  base  rate  of  task  failure.  Scores  were  aggregated  and  the  object  location
summary score consisted of the percentage of tasks that were passed.

The three Caregiver Location tasks were modelled after the object location tasks,
had the same format, and were acted out with LEGO characters and materials (Symons

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

12 Douglas K. Symons and Sharon E. Clark

et al., 1997). The difference from object location tasks was that, in these tasks, searches
took place for a parent-character rather than an object, and situations therefore incor-
porated separation of a child-character from their parent in home, beach, and cloth-
ing store change room settings. Mother-characters were used in the tasks to activate
attachment behavior that may be speciﬁc to that parent because the speciﬁc predictor
variables were relevant to mothers.

An  example  of  a  script  from  the  home  setting  is  as  follows.  A  gender-  and 
age-matched central character (e.g., ‘Julie’) is alone with his or her mother gardening
at  the  front  of  the  house. The  mother  says  she  has  to  get  a  garden  hose  at  the  left 
side of the house and goes around the side of the house in that direction. However,
the  mother  ﬁnds  the  hose  missing  and  unknown  to  Julie,  moves  around  the  back 
of  the  house  to  a  hidden  location  on  the  right  side  of  the  house.  Participants  were 
then handed the character and asked the following sequence of questions: (1) Show
me what Julie will do next. (false belief question: does Julie search where the mother
initially  went  to  before  or  after  searching  where  she  actually  is?);  (2)  Julie  needs  a
drink—where  will  Julie  now  look  for  her  mother?  (back  up  false  belief  question: 
necessary  only  if  Julie  does  not  initially  look  for  her  mother  after  the  open  ended
? (emotional
prompt); (3) Show me how Julie feels right now. Why does Julie feel 
justiﬁcation  control  question:  is  emotion  related  to  salient  features  of  the  task?); 
(4)  Where  did  Julie’s  mother  ﬁrst  look  for  the  garden  hose?  (ﬁrst  memory  control 
question); (5) When it wasn’t there, where did her mother look for the hose? (second
memory  control  question);  and  (6)  Was  Julie  with  her  mother  when  her  parent 
went  to  look  for  the  hose?  (third  memory  control  question).  The  emotional  justi-
ﬁcation  control  question  was  administered  in  the  same  fashion  as  for  Object 
Location tasks.

All children had the character initiate a search for their mother within 20-sec and
all eventually ‘found’ her. The way in which they searched, however, indicated whether
they had passed the task. Children who had the character initially search in the wrong
place (e.g., go around the left side of the house where the mother was supposed to be)
answered  consistent  with  an  understanding  of  false  belief.  Those  who  incorrectly
searched for the parent on the right side of the house where the parent actually was,
did not. The sequence of searching in these two locations therefore dictated perfor-
mance and it did not inﬂuence scoring if the participant directed the character to search
somewhere irrelevant during the task (e.g., behind a bush in the garden or look in the
windows to the house). Also, entry to the house was not permitted, i.e., the doors were
taped shut. As before, an item was included as a pass only if participants answered
three of the four control questions properly.

The two possible locations of the mother at the beach were a phone booth and ice
cream stand. The change room task story line was somewhat different. The child was
with their mother at a change room of a clothing store, went off to get a different shirt
to try on, and then in their absence, a janitor came to clean the change room and relo-
cated the mother from one change room to another. When the janitor was done and
had  left,  the  character  returned.  Where  they  sought  his  or  her  mother  was  used  to
assess false belief understanding. The change rooms were actually boxes with doors
that could be opened and closed.

Locations within each task were randomly counterbalanced and task sequence was
randomised. There was modest internal consistency between these three tasks (Cron-
bach’s alpha = .48). Data were collapsed across the three settings and the caregiver
location summary score consisted of the average number of these tasks passed.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

Relationships and Theory of Mind

13

Results

Performance on False Belief Tasks

Table  one  contains  the  percentages  of  children  passing  individual  tasks  as  well  as
means and standard deviations of summary scores for each type of task. All summary
scores ranged from 0% to 100%. A repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA)
was conducted on summary scores to show that performance varied across task type,
F(2,44) = 9.4, p < .001. Children performed signiﬁcantly above chance of .5 for object
identity and object location tasks, but most importantly, there were large and compa-
rable variances for each of the distributions despite different levels of performance.
This was important given variance in scores was necessary for predictive models to
be investigated later.

Follow up paired t-tests showed that as expected, children did more poorly on care-
giver location tasks than either object identity tasks, paired t(45) = 3.19, p < .01, or
object location  tasks,  paired  t(45) = 4.30,  p < .001. Performance on object identity
and object location tasks did not differ at the p < .05 level.

It was possible that performance differences were inﬂuenced by the actual age of
children at age ﬁve, given the wide range in months. The above analysis was rerun
with task type as a within factor and age entered as a covariate. Age failed to be a sig-
niﬁcant covariate, however, and the same pattern of task differences was found. The
impact  of  siblings  on  false  belief  task  performance  was  also  examined  given  that 
some studies have found a positive relationship between performance and number of

Table 1. False Belief Performance for Individual Tasks and Summary Scores

% of children
passing tasks

Mean

SD

Object identity

Egg carton/forks
Smarties box/rocks
Candle/apple
Eraser/magic marker
Milk carton/water
Flashlight/pen
Summary score

Object location

Kitchen-setting/toy radio
Bedroom-setting/marble
Summary score

Caregiver location

Home
Beach
Clothing store change room
Summary score

71.7
75.6
77.5
91.1
90.5
89.7

84.8
87.0

56.5
52.2
71.7

.81a

.86a

.29

.27

.60b

.34

Note. Means designated by different subscripts are different according to paired t-tests p < .05.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

14 Douglas K. Symons and Sharon E. Clark

siblings, and particularly older siblings. Number of siblings was unrelated to any of
the  three  performance  measures  (all  p’s >.  05).  In  addition,  whether  a  child  had  an
older sibling or not was entered as a between factor into a mixed ANOVA with per-
formance  as  a  within  factor  as  before. Again,  performance  differed  between  tasks
F(2,43) = 6.75, p < .01 but neither the between-effect of siblings, F(1,44) = .89, p =
.35, nor the task type X sibling interaction, F(2,43) = .78, p = .46, were signiﬁcant.
False  belief  task  performance  appeared  to  be  independent  from  sibling  variables,
although it is acknowledged that there was limited power to detect a relation with a
small effect size.

Maternal Emotional Distress

The next goal was to create measures of maternal emotional distress at two and ﬁve
years of age to simplify prediction models and create a more diverse construct of dis-
tress than provided by any single measure. Principal axis factoring with VARIMAX
rotation was undertaken of age two data, and only one factor was obtained with an
eigenvalue greater than or equal to 1. The factor represented the anticipated emotional
distress factor and accounted for 53.1% of the variance. Table two shows the factor
loadings  that  were  high  for  trait  and  state  anxiety,  depressive  symptoms,  emotion-
oriented coping, parent domain stress, and child domain stress, and low for task-ori-
ented coping and social support. Maternal emotional distress at age two became the
normalized score on this factor, with relatively high scores indicating relatively more
distress, and less social support and effective coping strategies.

This  analysis  was  repeated  on  the  same  set  of  measures  at  age  ﬁve  to  derive  a
measure of maternal emotional distress at that age. The factor analysis resulted in a
ﬁrst  factor  that  accounted  for  55.7%  of  the  variance,  and  table  two  shows  that  the
factor loadings were almost identical to those of age two, with the exception of child
domain  stress  that  no  longer  contributed  to  the  factor. The  normalized  factor  score
represented maternal emotional distress at age ﬁve.

Table  2. Factor  Analysis  of  Maternal  Emotional
Adjustment Measures at Age Two and Five

Two years
(n = 46)

Five years
(n = 41)

Variable

Trait anxiety
State anxiety
Depressive symptoms
Task-oriented coping
Emotion-oriented coping
Social support
Parent domain stress
Child domain stress

Eigenvalue
Percent variance explained

.90
.79
.88
-.52
.56
-.53
.81
.72
4.25
53.10

Note. Numbers represent factor loadings.

.87
.89
.91
-.66
.36
-.54
.42
-.02
4.45
55.70

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

Relationships and Theory of Mind

15

Preliminary Correlations

Intercorrelations  of  age  two  and  ﬁve  measures  are  presented  in  table  three.  As
expected,  attachment  security  at  age  two  was  highly  positively  related  to  maternal 
sensitivity  and  negatively  related  to  emotional  distress  at  the  same  age.  Emotional 
distress  showed  strong  continuity  between  the  two  ages.  Contrary  to  expectations,
maternal sensitivity was not signiﬁcantly related to emotional distress at either of the
ages, although there was a trend (p < .10) at age two with relatively more distressed
mothers being rated as less sensitive.

As predicted, participants scoring higher on caregiver location tasks at age ﬁve had
mothers rated as relatively more sensitive at age two. There was also a trend (p = .08)
for caregiver location to be related to emotional distress such that those children who
passed tasks at age ﬁve were relatively more likely to have mothers with higher emo-
tional distress at age two. Contrary to expectations, however, there were no signiﬁcant
correlations between attachment security at either of the ages and caregiver location
performance.  Object  location  summary  scores  were  positively  related  to  concurrent
attachment  security,  but  unrelated  to  maternal  sensitivity  or  attachment  security  at 
age two.

Table three also contains intercorrelations of the three different false belief summary
scores, and none of these were signiﬁcant. Finally, age was related to false beliefs for
object identity tasks with older children being more likely to pass the tasks.

Predicting False Beliefs from Age Two and Five Variables

For each of the three types of false belief tasks, two hierarchical regression analyses
were conducted to examine the contribution of age two and age ﬁve variables. Crite-
rion variables therefore consisted of object identity, object location, and caregiver loca-
tion summary scores. In all analyses, actual age at age ﬁve was entered in the ﬁrst step
in order to eliminate any contributions of age. In the ﬁrst set of analyses, the age two
predictor variables of attachment security, maternal sensitivity, and maternal emotional
distress were entered at the second step. Age ﬁve attachment security was entered at

Table 3. Correlation Matrix of Measures

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Age Two Measures
1. Attachment security
2. Maternal sensitivity
3. Maternal emotional distress

Age Five Measures
4. Child’s age in months
5. Attachment security
6. Maternal emotional distress
7. False belief object identity
8. False belief object location
9. False belief caregiver location

— .70***

—

-.36**
-.26+
—

.04
.06
.05

.38**
.19
-.29*

-.02
-.03
.60***

.02
.10
.02

— -.13

—

-.08
.03

—

.37**
.06
.01
—

.23
.10
-.03

.15
.30*
.14
.04

—

.16
.35*
.27+

.01
.06
.20
-.01
.14

—

Note. n = 46 for all correlations except those with emotional adjustment at age ﬁve where n = 41.
+ p < .10, * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

16 Douglas K. Symons and Sharon E. Clark

the third step. This sequence maximised predictive power of antecedent variables. In
the second set of analyses, steps two and three were reversed. This maximised the pre-
dictive power of age ﬁve attachment security and determined if age two variables pre-
dicted criterion variables after controlling for concurrent attachment security. Age ﬁve
maternal emotional distress was omitted from regression analyses for three reasons:
it was unrelated to any of the criterion variables, there were missing data points for
this  variable,  and  the  number  of  predictor  variables  needed  to  be  minimised. Table
four contains summary data of the respective regression analyses.

Consistent with bivariate correlations, children’s actual age at the time of the ﬁve-
year assessment predicted a signiﬁcant amount of variance in object identity perfor-
mance.  However,  after  age  was  incorporated  into  the  two  equations  with  different
sequences of entry, there were no other age two or ﬁve variables which predicted a
signiﬁcant amount of variance in scores regardless of the order of entry.

Age did not predict a signiﬁcant amount of variance of object location performance.
The subsequent pattern of results was only modestly affected by order of entry. When
age ﬁve attachment security was entered at the second step, the predictive equation
became signiﬁcant as attachment security accounted for additional 11% of the vari-
ance. The beta indicated that children with higher concurrent security scores had better
performance,  even  after  age  was  controlled. Age  two  predictors,  however,  failed  to
predict additional variance. This pattern was weaker when steps two and three were
reversed. Object location was not predicted by age two variables at step two. Age ﬁve
attachment security predicted an additional 7% of the variance when entered at step
three, which was signiﬁcant at the p < .10 level.

Caregiver location was not predicted by age at step one. Age ﬁve attachment secu-
rity also failed to predict caregiver location regardless of whether this was entered at
step two or three of the equations. Age two variables, however, predicted an additional
26% of the variance when entered at step two of the equation, and 28% of the addi-
tional variance when entered at step three. An examination of the betas showed that
this was due to signiﬁcant prediction of both maternal sensitivity and maternal emo-
tional distress, but not age two attachment security. Mothers who were relatively more
sensitive  and  in  more  emotional  distress  at  age  two  had  children  perform  better  on
caregiver location tasks three years later. This prediction was independent of attach-
ment security at either age, as well as variance in age at age ﬁve.

Discussion

The present study examined individual differences in performance on theory of mind
tasks using Q-sort observations of attachment security and maternal sensitivity, as well
as an aggregate of maternal emotional adjustment as predictors. Object location task
performance  was  related  to  the  concurrent  home-based  observational  measure  of
attachment  security. This  ﬁnding  is  consistent  with  the  other  recent  cross-sectional
studies  that  have  related  security  to  false  belief  performance  (Fonagy  et  al.,  1997),
metacognitive  skills  (Moss  et  al.,  1997),  and  emotional  understanding  (Laible  &
Thompson, 1998). Contrary to expectations, attachment security and maternal sensi-
tivity at age two did not predict object location task performance.

Developmental relations were evident, however, for unintended transfer tasks that
were modiﬁed to incorporate separation from a caregiver instead of a misplaced object
as  in  object  location  tasks.  Sensitive  parenting  and  maternal  emotional  distress  in
infancy were predictive of caregiver location performance at age ﬁve. These data are

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

 

©
B
l
a
c
k
w
e
l
l
 

P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 
L
t
d

.
 

2
0
0
0

S
o
c
i
a
l
 

D
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
t
,
 

9

,
 

1

,
 

2
0
0
0

Table  4. Hierarchical  Regressions  Performed  on  Object  Identity, Object  Location, and  Caregiver  Location  Summary  Score 
Criteria

Criteria

Step Variable (at age)

R2

R2inc

b

t

R2

R2inc

b

t

R2

R2inc

b

t

Object Identity

Object Location

Caregiver Location

1
2

3

1
2
3

Child age in months (5)
Attachment security (2)
Emotional distress (2)
Maternal sensitivity (2)
Attachment security (5)

Child age in months (5)
Attachment security (5)
Attachment security (2)
Emotional distress (2)
Maternal sensitivity (2)

.14**
.15

.14
.01

.17

.02

.14**
.15*
.17

.14
.01
.02

.368
-.074
.046
.138
.159

.368
.114
-.141
.074
.162

2.63**
-.35
.30
.68
.99

2.63**
.80
-.64
.47
.80

Note. + p < .10, * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.

.02
.06

First set of equations
.02
.150
.329
.08
.059
-.121
.292

.15

.07

Second set of equations
.02
.13*
.15

.02
.11
.02

.150
.323
.205
.111
-.078

.00
.26**

.00
.26

.28*

.02

.00
.00
.28*

.00
.00
.28

1.00
1.52
.37
-.58
1.79+

1.00
2.24*
.93
.70
-.38

.006
-.049
.376
.484
.124

.006
.065
-.101
.398
.503

.04
-.25
2.61**
2.58**
.83

.04
.43
-.49
2.71**
2.65**

R
e
l
a
t
i
o
n
s
h
i
p
s
 

 

a
n
d
T
h
e
o
r
y
 

o
f
 

M
i
n
d

1
7

18 Douglas K. Symons and Sharon E. Clark

thus  informative  to  a  growing  base  of  research  examining  how  various  features  of
parent-child relationships predict later indices of a theory of mind (see Dunn et al.,
1991; Fonagy et al., 1998; Meins, 1997; Meins et al., 1998). Even though attachment
security and maternal sensitivity are very highly related when assessed using comple-
mentary Q-sort observations (e.g., Pederson et al., 1990; Symons et al., in press), the
current  data  point  to  a  generalised  measure  of  sensitive  parenting  as  being  a  better 
predictor of performance than either antecedent or concurrent attachment security.

Maternal  sensitivity  is  a  critical  aspect  of  the  relationship  a  mother  has  with  her
child, and encompasses parental warmth and acceptance, availability for interactions,
and appropriate responsiveness within social interchange (e.g., Ainsworth et al., 1978;
DeWolfe & van IJzendoorn, 1997). Sensitive behavior by a mother means she is avail-
able  for  interactions,  cognisant  of  child  needs,  and  meets  these  needs  in  a  timely, 
unintrusive, and appropriate fashion. Maternal sensitivity is also dependent on both
relationship  partners.  Child  behavioral  characteristics  contribute  to  the  degree  of
harmony within parent-child interactions (e.g., Seifer, Schiller, Sameroff, Resnick, &
Riordan, 1996; Vaughn et al., 1992), i.e., some children may be harder to be sensitive
to than others.

A child presumably comes to learn something about his or her own mother’s desires
and intentions based on the history of caregiving exchanges, and these may be par-
ticularly  evident  during  structured  tasks.  Sensitivity  has  most  often  been  examined 
as  a  precursor  to  attachment  security. Thompson  (1997),  however,  described  it  as  a
catalyst for psychosocial growth through the conﬂict of intention and desires between
parents  and  children,  and  Bowlby  (1969/82)  suggested  that  within  a  goal-corrected
partnership, a child acquires insight into his or her mother’s feelings and motives. The
ﬁnding that maternal sensitivity at age two predicts theory of mind at age ﬁve is con-
sistent with a Vygotskian approach as mothers who are sensitive may behave within
a ‘zone of proximal development’ of the infant. Sroufe (1996) suggested that children
who have experienced responsive relationships are more likely to view relationships
in these terms and be empathic to the perspective of others. This may be fundamen-
tal to theory of mind acquisition.

In this study, maternal sensitivity was examined based on three to four hours of rel-
atively  unstructured  home  contact.  Others  have  more  closely  examined  sensitivity
during speciﬁc learning tasks. Meins (1997; see also Meins et al., 1998) operational-
ized sensitivity as a mother making appropriate modiﬁcations to her instruction based
on the performance of her 3-year-old child during a tutoring task, and found this pre-
dicted performance on an unintended transfer task at age four (r = .42). She concluded
that  maternal  ‘mind-mindedness’,  that  is,  awareness  of  the  mental  states  of  others,
could explain why sensitivity could relate to children’s subsequent understanding of
the  minds  of  others.  Given  the  potential  relation  between  social  understanding  and
metacognitive awareness, this is further supported by other work that has related insen-
sitive parenting to metacognitive deﬁcits in children (Main, 1991; Moss et al., 1997).
It is possible that sensitive parenting is more metacognitive because it includes reﬂec-
tion on child behavior and potential motives, and if these are verbalised, then the parent
is modelling this kind of reﬂection as they ‘think aloud’ about child behavior. Fonagy
et al. (1998) advanced a similar explanation to account for the relation found in their
study  between  attachment  security  and  theory  of  mind  acquisition. They  suggested
that the caregiver’s capacity to observe the moment-to-moment changes in the child’s
mental state is critical to mentalising capacity and theory of mind of the child (see
Fonagy et al., 1997). In the current study, sensitivity was related to caregiver location

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

Relationships and Theory of Mind

19

tasks but not those involving objects, which replicates the null-ﬁndings of Dunn et al.
(1991-b)  between  indices  of  parent-child  responsiveness  and  performance  on  false
belief tasks involving objects.

There was some evidence that mothers who were in more emotional distress at two
years of age had infants more likely to pass caregiver location tasks at ﬁve years of
age, and this relation was independent of security, sensitivity, and emotional adjust-
ment at  age  ﬁve. This ﬁnding  seemed  to be a function of trait anxiety and the per-
sonality characteristic of negative affectivity (Watson & Clark, 1984). This is the ﬁrst
study  to  examine  parental  distress  as  an  individual  difference  variable  in  theory  of
mind acquisition, so the ﬁndings are in need of replication and interpretations are nec-
essarily speculative. Individuals low in negative affectivity are known to be decisive,
calm, secure, and generally in a low state of tension or turmoil, and speciﬁc items on
the trait anxiety scale address these very issues (see Spielberger et al., 1983). Indi-
viduals high in negative affectivity are more ruminative, and these characteristics may
lead anxious parents to spend more time talking about what they and others think in
an indecisive fashion, which is another form of mentalising. It is important to note
that this was not a clinical sample and only a few individual scores were above clin-
ical cut-offs for measures, so emotional distress was examined within normal ranges
for the measures.

One explanation is that parental behavior associated with emotional distress may
provide another form of mentalising experience for young children. Relatively high but
non-clinical levels of parental distress may actually increase attentiveness to infant cues
and ‘thinking aloud’ about infant mental states. This would support suggestions that the
use of mental state language is an important family characteristic that contributes to
theory of mind. Another possible account is that the relation of parental negative affec-
tivity and theory of mind in children has something to do with adult working models
of relationships (Bretherton, 1985; Fonagy et al., 1998; Main et al., 1985). This would
be possible if insecure working models of relationships in adults are related to high neg-
ative  affectivity  and  family  expressiveness,  as  has  been  suggested  (see  Bell,  1998;
Kobak & Sceery, 1988). The caregiver location task addressed expectations a child had
for parents to behave in certain ways within the tasks, which would be fundamental to
child working models of parental behavior. Given the hypothesis that adult working
models inﬂuence the development of child working models, sensitive parenting and
theory of mind indices may be useful for understanding the transmission gap between
working model constructs (for review, see van IJzendoorn, 1995). Research is required
to develop and cross-validate measures of working models in children.

Limitations of the current study are related to the observational measures and false
belief  tasks  chosen.  The  AQS  has  generally  accepted  reliability  and  validity,  but
because it provides a single quantitative measure on a security dimension, potentially
important  distinctions  between  insecure-avoidant  and  -resistant  infants  are  lost  (see
Waters et al., 1995). This may be the basis of the failure here to replicate relations
between age two attachment security and later false belief performance for tasks involv-
ing objects (as in Fonagy et al., 1998; Meins et al., 1998). The AQS may also have been
problematic for use with children as old as six years of age, although preliminary analy-
ses supported the stability of both total scores and speciﬁc behavior-loadings across this
time frame (Symons et al., 1998). There are other pre-school derivatives of the strange
situation that would provide qualitative distinctions between dyads at ﬁve years of age
that could have been used to concurrently validate the AQS with older children. On the
other hand, there were advantages to using a regression approach with the small sample

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

20 Douglas K. Symons and Sharon E. Clark

size rather than subdividing dyads into very small groups based on attachment classi-
ﬁcation.  Finally,  the  current  study  was  guilty  of  examining  mothers  and  ignoring
fathers. This was not done for any particular theoretical reason, but merely because of
the  availability  of  the  longitudinal  sample.  New  data  being  collected  elsewhere  on
father-infant attachment security will permit future studies on the potential role fathers
play in the development of social understanding.

The development of a caregiver location task ultimately became fundamental to the
study and suggested prediction across ages was only for false beliefs in which rela-
tionship constructs were embedded in the tasks. It is not known whether the same ﬁnd-
ings would have been obtained were other adults or other social beings used within the
tasks. Such differences would be critical, however, as they may isolate speciﬁc expec-
tations children have for caregivers as opposed to social beings in general. There was
also a potential problem in a ceiling effect for false belief scores involving objects.
Although  the  ranges  were  comparable  across  tasks,  the  means  for  tasks  involving
objects were high. The sample was not at an age when theory of mind was ‘emerging’
(i.e., performance was near chance of 50%), but instead, was at an age when most chil-
dren did very well on tasks. On the other hand, ceiling effects work against ﬁnding cor-
relations with relationship indices, so the current ﬁndings may be conservative given
the age-range of the sample. The ages chosen, however, were also very appropriate for
caregiver location tasks where performance was at chance levels.

Keeping these limitations in mind, the current study supports the central hypothe-
sis that aspects of early mother-child relationships in infancy predict theory of mind
performance within false belief tasks at the close of the preschool period. Like other
studies, however, not all relationship indices predicted performance on all false belief
tasks.  Further  research  is  therefore  necessary  to  clarify  speciﬁc  developmental
processes associated with a theory of mind displayed in different kinds of tasks. Dis-
entangling  the  roles  of  parental  sensitivity,  emotion  coherence  of  child  response  to
tasks,  and  emergent  working  models  of  relationships  could  be  important  goals  of
future investigations examining how children come to understand social situations and
what is in the minds of others.

References
Abidin, R. (1990). Parenting Stress Index. Charlottesville, VA: Pediatric Psychology Press.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of attachment: A

psychological study of the Strange Situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Astington, J. W. (1993). The child’s discovery of the mind. Cambridge, MS: Harvard Univer-

sity Press.

Astington, J. W. & Jenkins, J. (1995). Theory of mind development and social understanding.

Cognition and Emotion, 9, 151–165.

Atkinson et al. (1995). Cognitive coping, affective distress, and maternal sensitivity: Mothers

of children with Down Syndrome. Developmental Psychology, 31, 668–676.

Baldwin,  D. A.  &  Moses,  L.  J.  (1996). The  ontogeny  of  social  information-gathering.  Child

Barresi, J. & Moore, C. (1996). Intentional relations and social understanding. Behavioral and

Belsky, J. (1984). The determinants of parenting: A process model. Child Development, 55 (1),

Development, 67, 1915–1939.

Brain Sciences, 19, 107–154.

83–96.

Bell, K. L. (1998). Family expressiveness and attachment. Social Development, 7, 37–53.
Blishen, B. R., Carroll, W. K., & Moore, C. (1987). The 1981 socioeconomic index for occu-

pations in Canada. Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology, 24, 465–488.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

Relationships and Theory of Mind

21

Bowlby, J. (1969/1982). Attachment and loss, Vol. 1: Attachment (2nd Ed.). New York: Basic

Books. (Originally published 1969)

Bretherton, I. (1985). Attachment theory: Retrospect and prospect. In I. Bretherton & E. Waters
(Eds.), Growing points of attachment theory and research. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 50 (1–2, Serial No. 209).

Crnic, K. A. & Greenbery, M. T. (1990). Minor parenting stresses with young children. Child

Development, 62, 930–953.

Crockenberg, S. & Litman, C. (1991). Effects of maternal employment on maternal and two-

year-old child behaviour. Child Development, 62, 930–953.

DeWolff, M. S. & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1997). Sensitivity and attachment: A meta-analysis

on parental antecedents of infant attachment. Child Development, 68, 571–591.

Dix, T. (1991). The affective organization of parenting: Adaptive and maladaptive processes.

Downey,  G.  &  Coyne,  J.  C.  (1990).  Children  of  depressed  parents:  An  integrative  review. 

Psychological Bulletin, 110, 3–25.

Psychological Bulletin, 108, 50–76.

Dunn,  J.  (1991).  Understanding  others:  Evidence  from  naturalistic  studies  of  children.  In A.

Whiten (Ed.), Natural theories of mind (pp. 51–61). Cambridge, MS: Basil Blackwell.

Dunn, J., Brown, J., & Beardsall, L. (1991-a). Family talk about feeling states and children’s

later understanding of other’s emotions. Developmental Psychology, 27, 448–455.

Dunn, J., Brown, J., Slomkowski, C., Tesla, C., & Youngblade, L. (1991-b). Young children’s
understanding  of  other  people’s  feelings  and  beliefs:  Individual  differences  and  their
antecedents. Child Development, 62, 1352–1366.

Dunn,  J.  (1995).  Children  as  psychologists: The  later  correlates  of  individual  differences  in

understanding of emotions and other minds. Cognition and Emotion, 9, 187–201.

Endler, N. S. & Parker, J. D. A. (1991). Coping Inventory for Stressful Situations. Multi-Health

Systems Inc.

Flavell,  J.  H.  (1979).  Metacognition  and  cognitive  monitoring:  A  new  area  of  cognitive-

developmental inquiry. American Psychologist, 34 (10), 906–911.

Flavell, J. H., Green, F. L., & Flavell, E. R. (1986). Development of knowledge about the appear-
ance-reality  distinction.  Monographs  of  the  Society  for  Research  in  Child  Development,
51(Serial No. 212).

Fonagy. P., Redfern, S., & Charman, T. (1997). The relationship between belief-desire reason-
ing and a projective measure of attachment security (SAT). British Journal of Developmen-
tal Psychology, 15, 51–61.

Fonagy, P., Steele, H., Steele, M., & Holder, J. (1997). Attachment and theory of mind: Over-

lapping constructs? Bonding and Attachment, 14, 31–40.

Fonagy, P., Steele, M., Steele, H., & Holder, J. (1998). Children securely attached in infancy

perform better in belief-desire reasoning task at age ﬁve. Manuscript under review.

Fonagy,  P.  &  Target,  M.  (1997).  Attachment  and  reﬂective  function:  Their  role  in  self-

organization. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 679–700.

Frye, D. & Moore, C. (1991). Children’s theories of mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Frye, D., Zelazo, P. D., & Palfai, T. (1995). Theory of mind and rule-based reasoning. Cogni-

Gelfand, D. M. & Teti, D. M. (1990). The effects of maternal depression on children. Clinical

tive Development, 10, 483–527.

Psychology Review, 10, 329–353.

Gelman,  S.  A.  &  Gottfried,  G.  M.  (1996).  Children’s  causal  explanations  of  animate  and 

inanimate motion. Child Development, 67, 1970–1987.

Gopnik,  A.  (1993).  How  we  know  our  minds:  The  illusion  of  ﬁrst-person  knowledge  of 

intentionality. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 1–14.

Gopnik, A. (1997). How the child’s theory of mind changes. Paper presented at the meeting of

the Society for Research in Child Development, Washington, D. C.

Gopnik, A. & Astington, J. W. (1988). Children’s understanding of representational change and
its relation to the understanding of false belief and the appearance-reality distinction. Child
Development, 59, 26–37.

Howes, C. & Smith, E. W. (1995). Children and their child caregivers: Proﬁles of relationships.

Social Development, 4, 44–61.

Hinde, R. A. & Stevenson-Hinde, J. (1988). (Eds.). Relationships within families: Mutual inﬂu-

ences. New York: Oxford University Press.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

22 Douglas K. Symons and Sharon E. Clark

Jenkins, J. M. & Astington, J. W. (1996). Cognitive factors and family structure associated with

Theory of Mind development in young children. Developmental Psychology, 32, 70–78.

Kaye, K. (1982). The mental and social life of babies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kobak,  R.  R.  &  Sceery, A.  (1988). Attachment  in  late  adolescence: Working  models,  affect 

regulation, and representation of self and others. Child Development, 59, 135–146.

Laible, D. J. & Thompson, R. A. (1998). Attachment and emotional understanding in preschool

children. Developmental Psychology, 34, 1038–1045.

Main, M. (1991). Metacognitive knowledge, metacognitive monitoring, and singular (coherent)
vs.  multiple  (incoherent)  model  of  attachment.  In  C.  M.  Parkes,  J.  Stevenson-Hinde,  &  P.
Marris (Eds.), Attachment across the life cycle (pp. 127–159). Routledge: New York.

Main, M., Kaplan, N., & Cassidy, J. (1985). Security in infancy, childhood and adulthood: A
move to the level of representation. In I. Bretherton & E. Waters (Eds.), Growing points of
attachment theory and research. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Develop-
ment, 50 (1–2, Serial No. 209).

Meins. (1997). Security of attachment and the social development of cognition. Hove, UK: Psy-

chology Press.

Meins, E., Fernyhough, C., Russell, J., Clark-Carter, D. (1998). Security of attachment as a pre-
dictor of symbolic and mentalising abilities: A longitudinal study. Social Development, 7 (1),
1–24.

Moses, L. J. & Flavell, J. H. (1990). Inferring false beliefs from actions and reactions. Child

Development, 61, 929–945.

Moss, E. B., Gosseling, C., Parent, S., Rousseau, D., & Dumont, M. (1997). Attachment and
joint problem-solving experiences during the preschool period. Social Development, 6 (1),
1–17.

Nguyen, L. & Frye, D. (1999). Children’s theory of mind: Understanding desire, belief, and

emotion with social referents. Social Development, 8, 70–92.

Pederson, D. R. & Moran, G. (1995). A categorical description of infant-mother relationships
in the home and its relation to Q-sort measures of infant-mother interaction. In E. Waters,
B. E. Vaughn, G. Posada, & K. Kondo-Ikemura (Eds.), Caregiving, cultural, and cognitive
perspectives on secure-base behavior and working models: New growing points of attach-
ment theory and research. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
60(2–3, Serial No. 244).

Pederson, D. R., Moran, G., Sitko, C., Campbell, K., Ghesquire, K., & Acton, H. (1990). Mater-
nal sensitivity and the security of infant-mother attachment: A Q-sort study. Child Develop-
ment, 61, 1974–1983.

Perner, J. (1991). Understanding the representational mind. Cambridge, MS: M. I. T. Press.
Perner, J., Leekam, S. R., & Wimmer, H. (1987). Three-year-olds’ difﬁculty with false belief:
The case for a conceptual deﬁcit. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 5, 125–137.
Perner, J., Ruffman, T., & Leekam, S. R. (1994). Theory of mind is contagious: You catch it

from your sibs. Child Development, 65, 1228–1238.

Poulin-Dubois,  D.  &  Shultz,  T.  F.  (1990).  The  infant’s  concept  of  agency:  The  distinction

between social and non-social objects. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 151, 77–90.

Radloff,  L.  S.  (1977). The  CES-D  Scale: A  self-report  depression  scale  for  research  in  the

general population. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1, 385–401.

Ruffman, T. (1997). The social determinants of theory of mind understanding. Paper presented

at the Society for Research in Child Development conference Washington, D. C.

Ruffman, T., Perner, J., Naito, M., Parkin, L., & Clements, W. A. (1998). Older (but not younger)

siblings facilitate false belief understanding. Developmental Psychology, 34, 161–174.

Seifer, R., Schiller, M., Sameroff, A. J., Resnick, S., & Riordan, K. (1996). Attachment, mater-
nal sensitivity, and temperament during the ﬁrst year of life. Developmental Psychology, 32,
12–25.

Spielberger, C. D., Gorsuch, R. L., Lushene, R., Vagg, P. R., & Jacobs, G. A. (1983). Manual

for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Consulting Psychologists Press.

Sroufe, A. (1996). Emotional development: the organization of emotional life in the early years.

Cambridge: University of Cambridge.

Stern, D. (1985). The interpersonal world of the infant. New York: Basic Books.
Symons, D. (1998-a). Maternal and infant predictors of Q-sort attachment security and mater-

nal sensitivity in the ﬁrst two years. Manuscript under review.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

Relationships and Theory of Mind

23

Symons,  D.  (1998-b).  Post-partum  employment  patterns,  family-based  care  arrangements, 
and the mother-infant relationship at age two. Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science, 30,
121–131.

Symons, D. K., Noiles, L., & Richards, C. (in press). Concurrent Q-sort and behavioral indi-
cators  of  maternal  sensitivity  and  infant-mother  attachment  security  at  age  two.  In  B.  E.
Vaughn & E. Waters (Eds.), Patterns of secure base behavior: Q-sort perspectives on attach-
ment and caregiving. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Symons, D., Clark, S., Isaksen, G., & Marshall, J. (1998). Stability of Q-sort attachment secu-

rity from age two to ﬁve. Infant Behavior and Development, 21, 745–752.

Symons, D., McLaughlin, E., Moore, C., & Morine, S. (1997). Integrating relationship con-
structs  and  emotional  experience  into  false  belief  tasks  in  preschool  children.  Journal  of
Experimental Child Psychology, 67, 423–447.

Symons, D. & McLeod, P. (1994). Maternal, infant, and occupational characteristics that predict

post-partum employment patterns. Infant Behavior and Development, 17, 71–82.

Taylor,  M.  &  Carlson,  S.  (1997). The  relation  between  individual  differences  in  fantasy  and

theory of mind. Child Development, 68(3), 436–455.

Thompson, R. A. (1997). Sensitivity and security: New questions to ponder. Child Develop-

ment, 68, 595–597.

van  IJzendoorn,  M.  I.  (1995).  Adult  attachment  representations,  parental  responsiveness, 
and infant attachment: A meta-analysis on the predictive validity of the Adult Attachment
Interview. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 387–403.

van  IJzendoorn,  M.  H.,  Goldberg,  S.,  Kroonenberg,  P.  M.,  &  Frenkel,  O.  J.  (1992).  The 
relative effect of maternal and child problems on the quality of attachment: A meta-analysis
of attachment in clinical samples. Child Development, 63, 840–858.

Vaughn,  B.  E.,  Stevenson-Hinde,  J., Waters,  E.,  Kotsaftis, A.,  Lefever,  G.  B.,  Shouldice, A.,
Trudel, M., & Belsky, J. (1992). Attachment security and temperament in infancy and early
childhood: Some conceptual clariﬁcations. Developmental Psychology, 28, 463–473.

Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Waters, E. (1987). Attachment Q-set (version 3.0). State University of New York at Stony Brook.

Stony Brook, NY 11794.

ewaters/AQS/htm].

Waters,  E.  (1997).  The  AQS  Advisor.  Taken  from  website  [http:www.psy.sunysb.edu/-

Waters, E. & Deane, K. (1985). Deﬁning and assessing individual differences in attachment
relationships: Q-methodology and the organization of behavior in infancy and early child-
hood. In I. Bretherton & E. Waters (Eds.), Growing points of attachment theory and research.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 50(1–2, Serial No. 209).

Waters, E., Vaughn, B. E., Posada, G., & Kondo-Ikemura, K. (Eds.) (1995). Caregiving, cul-
tural, and cognitive perspectives on secure-base behavior and working models: New growing
points of attachment theory and research. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 60 (2–3, Serial No. 244).

Watson,  D.  &  Clark,  L.  (1984).  Negative  affectivity: The  disposition  to  experience  aversive

emotional states. Psychological Bulletin, 96, 465–490.

Wellman, H. (1990). The child’s theory of mind. Cambridge, MS: M. I. T. Press.
Wimmer, H. & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representations and constraining func-
tion  of  wrong  beliefs  in  young  children’s  understanding  of  deception.  Cognition, 13,
103–128.

Acknowledgements
A Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRCC) General Grant sup-
ported this research, and a SSHRCC Doctoral Fellowship supported the second author. Thanks
go to the mothers and children for their support. C. Moore and three anonymous reviewers are
thanked  for  their  helpful  comments.  C.  Richards,  L.  White,  L.  Noiles, T.  Szuszkiewicz,  G.
Isaksen, & J. Marshall assisted with data collection.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Social Development, 9, 1, 2000

