ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 08 March 2016
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00227

All for One: Contributions of Age,
Socioeconomic Factors, Executive
Functioning, and Social Cognition to
Moral Reasoning in Childhood

Evelyn Vera-Estay1,2, Anne G. Seni1, Caroline Champagne1 and
Miriam H. Beauchamp1,2*

1 Department of Psychology, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2 Sainte-Justine Hospital Research Center,
Montreal, QC, Canada

Moral reasoning (MR) is a socio-cognitive skill essential to appropriate social functioning
in childhood, and evolves in quality and complexity during ontogenetic development.
Past research suggests that MR is related to age, socioeconomic factors, as well as
some social and cognitive skills, such as executive functioning (EF), theory of mind
(ToM), empathy, and affect recognition. However, their contributions have been studied
in silos rather than comprehensively, with little integration of the relative and combined
contribution of these skills to MR. Furthermore, few studies have addressed the putative
links between these factors in childhood, a period during which these skills are in
maturation. The aim of this study was to explore what factors predict moral maturity in
typically developing children (n = 76, 47.4% males, M = 9.2, SD = 1.67 years), explore
the potential moderating and mediating role of executive functions and social cognition
in the relationship between age and MR maturity, and identify the speciﬁc contributions
of age, socioeconomic factors, EF, and social cognition, using an innovative visual MR
assessment tool (So-Moral). The results indicate that MR maturity was correlated with
age, EF (inhibition, verbal ﬂuency, and attentional control), and social cognition (ToM
and affect recognition). Neither EF nor social cognition moderated the effect of age on
MR maturity. However, verbal ﬂuency and third-order false beliefs had a moderating role
in this link. MR maturity in children was predicted by three variables from each of the
three domains: age, verbal ﬂuency, and third-order ToM. These results contribute to a
better understanding of the underpinnings of MR during childhood, suggesting that MR
is not reducible to general developmental factors such as age, but that higher order
skills, such EF and social cognition also contribute to moral maturity. The ﬁndings have
relevance for both typically developing and clinical populations in which social skills may
be reduced, as well as for the identiﬁcation of potential loci for intervention in children
at-risk for socially maladaptive behaviors.

Keywords: moral reasoning, executive functions, affect recognition, theory of mind, childhood

Edited by:
Natasha Kirkham,
Cornell University, USA

Reviewed by:
Ayelet Lahat,
McMaster University, Canada
Tobias Krettenauer,
Wilfrid Laurier University, Canada

*Correspondence:
Miriam H. Beauchamp
miriam.beauchamp@umontreal.ca

Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Developmental Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology

Received: 10 November 2015
Accepted: 04 February 2016
Published: 08 March 2016

Citation:
Vera-Estay E, Seni AG, Champagne C
and Beauchamp MH (2016) All
for One: Contributions of Age,
Socioeconomic Factors, Executive
Functioning, and Social Cognition
to Moral Reasoning in Childhood.
Front. Psychol. 7:227.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00227

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

1

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

Vera-Estay et al.

INTRODUCTION

Humans, as social beings and moral agents, are faced with making
their ﬁrst moral decisions much before attaining cognitive,
emotional, and social maturity. In everyday life, children have to
evaluate morally relevant situations in order to make decisions
concerning social behaviors such as fair play, admit
their
wrongdoings, participate or not in bullying, and so on, by
using abilities that are not yet consolidated. Current research
demonstrates that children are able to diﬀerentiate moral issues
from social conventions and personal choices (Turiel, 2002),
and that their moral understanding increases during ontogenetic
development, presumably growing in parallel with cognitive
abilities and social cognition (Lane et al., 2010). In addition,
some studies suggest that demographic factors such as maternal
education and social risk could inﬂuence moral understanding
(Dunn et al., 2000; Arsenio and Gold, 2006; Hinnant et al., 2013).
Thus, moral reasoning (MR) in childhood is likely to
be underpinned by cognitive, socio-cognitive, and aﬀective
capacities in maturation, as well as by demographic factors.
However, whereas past research suggests an association between
MR skills and the development of some social and cognitive
skills, such as executive functioning (EF; Hinnant et al.,
2013),
theory of mind (ToM; Baird and Astington, 2004),
empathy (Hoﬀman, 2000), and aﬀect recognition (Blair et al.,
2001a), their contributions have been studied in silos rather
than comprehensively, with little integration of the relative
and combined contribution of
these skills to MR, or the
potential mediation and moderation eﬀects of these skills in
the relationship between age and MR skills. Understanding the
building blocks of MR skills in childhood has relevance for both
typically developing and clinical populations in which social skills
may be reduced.

Moral Reasoning and Socioeconomic
Factors
Broadly, some studies indicate that moral understanding may
be aﬀected by demographic factors, such as socioeconomic
status and social risk in particular (Haidt et al., 1993; Dunn
et al., 2000; Arsenio and Gold, 2006). However, concerning MR
skills speciﬁcally, some studies have found a positive link with
socioeconomic status (Cui et al., 2015) and maternal education
(Hinnant et al., 2013), while others have not shown such an
association (Caravita et al., 2012; Malti et al., 2013; Vera-Estay
et al., 2014), including a large-scale longitudinal study from
childhood to early adolescence (Daniel et al., 2014).

Moral Reasoning and Socio-Cognitive
Skills
Social cognition is a broad construct referred to as the human
capacity to think about others’ thoughts, intentions, feelings,
attitudes, and perspectives, enabling us to interact in the social
world (Sharp et al., 2008). MR is a speciﬁc component of social
cognition, deﬁned as the thinking mechanism through which
moral judgments about right and wrong are attained (Moll et al.,
2005). Elementary manifestations of MR can be observed as early

Social Cognition in Childhood

as infancy (Malti and Latzko, 2010; Decety et al., 2012), but it is
during early childhood that MR skills begin to be more explicit,
as children interact verbally with peers, siblings and adults,
resolve conﬂicts and negotiate social situations, leading them
to experience concepts such as reciprocity, fairness, and justice
(Killen and Rutland, 2011). MR skills continue to increase during
middle childhood, supporting prosocial tendencies toward peers
and adults (Miller et al., 1996). According to Social Domain
theory (Turiel, 2002), during this period, children learn to
distinguish and progressively coordinate three main forms
of social knowledge: moral, social, and psychological, adding
ﬂexibility and nuance to their interpretation of the social world.
Moral knowledge related to fairness, justice, welfare and rights,
changes during childhood. Thus, whereas younger children tend
to evaluate moral situations based on concrete concepts of
harm and welfare, older children favor abstract concepts of
justice and rights (Turiel, 2002; Killen and Rutland, 2011). This
evolution is likely inﬂuenced by global cognitive development,
in particular by the evolution of high order cognitive skills
such as executive functions (EF), a broad range of skills that
are implicated in regulating thinking and behavior (Kerr and
Zelazo, 2004), and by other socio-cognitive functions developing
in parallel.

In addition to MR, socio-cognitive skills include several
other mental processes used to perceive and process social cues,
stimuli, and environments (Beauchamp and Anderson, 2010).
Research in developmental psychopathology has shown that poor
social functioning may be in part explained by deﬁcits in these
functions (for a review, see Sharp et al., 2008). Considering that
even normal variations in socio-cognitive skills could potentially
translate into inter-individual diﬀerences in social functioning,
the current study focused on the associations between MR
skills during childhood and three fundamental aspects of social
cognition: aﬀect recognition, empathy, and ToM.

Affect Recognition
Humans are born with an innate preference for faces (Johnson
and Morton, 1991). They communicate important information
about the emotional state of individuals, which is essential for
accurately interpreting social situations. Facial aﬀect recognition
develops rapidly during infancy and early childhood (Herba et al.,
2006) and continues to evolve during late childhood, adolescence,
and even adulthood (Thomas et al., 2007). The evolution of this
skill appears to be inﬂuenced by other neurocognitive abilities,
speciﬁcally by EF, as demonstrated in a study of 1000 healthy
individuals (6 to 91 years; Mathersul et al., 2009). Consistent with
these ﬁndings, Rosenqvist et al. (2014) found that EF, language,
and ToM skills are signiﬁcant predictors of children’s aﬀect
recognition.

Recognizing others’ emotions in moral conﬂicts is likely to
inﬂuence MR. Deﬁcits in facial aﬀect recognition are associated
with psychopathy in youth and adult oﬀenders (Hastings et al.,
2008; Bowen et al., 2014), but also in children with psychopathic
tendencies, who appear to be less sensitive to sad and fearful
facial expressions compared to control groups (Blair et al., 2001a;
Stevens et al., 2001), suggesting a link between aﬀect recognition
and morality.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

2

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

Vera-Estay et al.

Social Cognition in Childhood

Empathy
“Empathy is the ability to experience and understand what others
feel without confusion between oneself and others” (Decety and
Lamm, 2006, p. 1146). Empathy is critical to regulating behavior
during social interactions and has been related to prosocial
MR, moral motivation and prosocial behavior (Eisenberg and
Mussen, 1978; Eisenberg and Fabes, 1990; Miller et al., 1996;
Roberts and Strayer, 1996; Hoﬀman, 2000; Eisenberg et al., 2002;
Eisenberg, 2003; Beauchamp et al., 2013). However, research
demonstrates a complex relation between empathy and morality.
Globally, empathy contributes to MR because it informs on the
emotional state of the actors involved in social situations. These
emotional states include victim’s suﬀering, as well as victimizer
emotional experience toward the moral conﬂict, which may
prevent the rationalization of moral transgressions. Despite this,
empathic tendencies could also interfere with MR, introducing
in-group bias and justifying immoral behaviors (Decety and
Cowell, 2015). Moreover, given that the general term “empathy”
is used for describing several more speciﬁc aﬀective and cognitive
concepts, the relationship between empathy and other cognitive
and behavior variables tends to be blurred (Decety and Cowell,
2014).

Theory of Mind
Theory of mind refers to the cognitive ability that allows
us to understand other people as intentional, perceptive, and
emotional agents, or to interpret
their minds in terms of
intentional, perceptual, or feeling states (Moll et al., 2005). ToM
skills involve progressive abilities that enable inference of other’s
mental states at diﬀerent levels of recursive thinking (ﬁrst-order
belief, John thinks X; second-order belief, John thinks Mary thinks
X; third-order belief, John thinks what Mary thinks that he thinks
X, and so on), helping to understand the complexity of human
social interactions. However, when we infer others’ mental states,
we must also determine whether they diﬀer from reality or from
our own knowledge about the world, an ability called “false
belief understanding.” First-, second-, and third-order false belief
tasks assess false belief understanding at diﬀerent levels of ToM
(Korkmaz, 2011).

Whereas ﬁrst order ToM is generally mastered by healthy
children at around 5 years of age, second and third-order
ToM, as well as false belief understanding, continue to develop
through childhood and adolescence (Liddle and Nattle, 2006;
Dumontheil et al., 2010), supported by the development of
social experience and speciﬁc high-level cognitive abilities such
as EF. Thus, according to a meta-analysis conducted by Devine
and Hughes (2014), EF in the preschool years is a signiﬁcant
predictor of false belief understanding at school-age, and these
ﬁndings are consistent across diﬀerent EF tasks and cultures.
Theoretically, cognitive inhibition is a central mechanism in false
belief understanding, because it requires inhibition of one’s own
knowledge in order to think about other’s mental states (Birch
and Bloom, 2004). ToM and EF are considered to be the cognitive
bases of social perspective-taking (Gibbs, 2013).

There is growing evidence of the association between MR
and ToM skills (Lagattuta, 2005; Wainryb and Brehl, 2006;
Killen et al., 2011; Smetana et al., 2012). ToM is potentially

implicated in the evaluation of moral situations, because it
provides information about the intention and motivation of
others’, two key aspects in the evaluation of moral values (Baird
and Astington, 2004). A cognitive neuroscience study (Young
et al., 2007) conﬁrms this view suggesting that moral judgment
depends on cognitive processes mediated by brain areas related
to belief attribution and ToM. Research in typically developing
children indicates that as children grow,
they increasingly
incorporate information about mental states in their moral
evaluations (Cushman et al., 2013). In addition, children who
rely on more advanced ToM, including false belief, have better
moral understanding (Dunn et al., 2000) and more mature MR
(Baird and Astington, 2004), which is consistent with the results
of a longitudinal study conducted by Lane et al. (2010) in which
ToM skills predicted more mature (societally-oriented) MR in
children.

Moral Reasoning and Executive
Functions
the intense evolution of EF, and in
As mentioned above,
particular,
inhibition, during infancy and early childhood
is associated with the development of socio-cognitive skills
(Barkley, 1997; Beauchamp and Anderson, 2010), with better EF
positively associated with social competence (Kochanska et al.,
2000), ToM (Carlson and Moses, 2001; Devine and Hughes,
2014), and moral understanding (Decety and Howard, 2013).
Moreover, EF has been shown to be a signiﬁcant predictor
of later social functioning, contributing to social adjustment
and resilience (Eisenberg et al., 2004; Martel et al., 2007;
Miller and Hinshaw, 2010). However, there are few studies
addressing the speciﬁc link between EF and MR in childhood
and their results support the need for further investigation.
A recent study in healthy school-aged children demonstrated
that executive skills are positively associated with MR (Hinnant
et al., 2013), consistent with ﬁndings in school-aged children
with developmental disabilities and frontal lesions (Couper et al.,
2002; Kretschmer et al., 2014). Recent research also supports
this link in adolescents, in whom more mature MR was found
to be associated with several executive functions (conceptual
reasoning, cognitive ﬂexibility, verbal ﬂuency, and feedback
utilization), with ﬂexibility and verbal ﬂuency independently
predicting MR maturity, after controlling for the eﬀects of
age and intelligence (Vera-Estay et al., 2014). However, these
associations have not been tested in children, nor do we know
how they play out when socio-cognitive skills are considered in
combination.

THE CURRENT STUDY

to developmental

study contributes

The present
socio-
cognitive research by exploring the combined and independent
contributions of age and socioeconomic status, cognitive and
socio-cognitive variables to MR maturity skills using a novel,
developmentally appropriate, visual
the
study aimed to: (1) evaluate the association between MR, age,
socioeconomic variables (family income and parental education),

task. Speciﬁcally,

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

3

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

Vera-Estay et al.

Social Cognition in Childhood

EF (attentional control, inhibition, and verbal ﬂuency), and social
cognition (empathy, ToM, and aﬀect recognition); (2) evaluate
whether EF moderates or mediates the relationship between age
and MR skills (3) evaluate whether executive and social cognition
variables mediate or moderate the relationship between age
and MR skills (4) assess the contribution of social cognition
to MR maturity, after controlling for EF and age. In line with
current literature on MR development described above, it was
expected that age, executive and socio-cognitive functions would
be positively correlated with MR maturity. Considering previous
results using the So-Moral task (Vera-Estay et al., 2014), we
expected that socioeconomic variables would not be associated
with MR scores. Regarding moderation and mediation eﬀects,
we expected that EF and social cognition variables would play a
mediating and moderating role in the relationship between age
and MR skills. We also expected that age and EF would predict
MR maturity and speciﬁcally, that verbal ﬂuency would have
an independent contribution to MR scores. Concerning social
cognition, on the basis of current literature (Dunn et al., 2000;
Baird and Astington, 2004; Lane et al., 2010; Cushman et al.,
2013) we expected that it would predict MR scores, with ToM
making the largest contribution.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Participants
Seventy-six participants between 6 and 12 years (47.4% males,
M = 9.2, SD = 1.67 years) participated in this study. All
participants and their families were French speakers. They
were predominantly Caucasian (95%), had no history of any
psychiatric or neurological condition, had IQ levels in the low
to high average range (87–129, M = 108.6, SD = 9.9) and
were primarily from middle-class families according to their
income (Statistics Canada, 2015). Participants were identiﬁed
and recruited through regular primary schools in Quebec,
Canada. All parents provided written informed consent prior
to participation. Participants were compensated $30 for their
participation. The Research Ethics Committee of the Faculty of
Arts and Science at the University of Montreal approved the
study.

for order

Measures
To control
two
counterbalancing procedures were applied randomly across
participants: one to the order of the whole testing session, and
one to the order of the dilemmas in the So-Moral task (see
below). The following measures were administered.

assessments,

eﬀects

in the

Demographic and Developmental Questionnaire
Parents’ of participants completed a questionnaire pertaining to
their child’s medical, developmental, and social history, as well
parents’ education level, ethnicity, and income.

Intellectual Functioning
The Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of
(WASI,
Wechsler, 1999) was used to provide an estimate of general

Intelligence

intellectual ability based on the Vocabulary and Matrix
Reasoning subtests (IQ, M = 100, SD = 15).

Theory of Mind
To assess children’s ability to infer other people’s mental states,
the Theory of Mind Picture Stories task (Brune, 2005; Bechi
et al., 2012) was administered. This task consists of six cartoon
picture storied depicted on four cards each. Two are stories in
which two characters cooperate, two are stories in which one
character deceives another, and two stories show two characters
cooperating to deceive a third. The cards are presented face-
down in mixed order; participants are asked to turn the cards
over and to order them in a logical sequence of events. For each
cartoon story sequenced correctly a maximum score of 6 can be
obtained: two points are given each for the ﬁrst and last correctly
sequenced picture and one point each for the third and fourth
picture. After the children correctly arrange the four cards, they
are asked to answer questions that pertain to the mental states of
the diﬀerent characters, including questions of ﬁrst-, second-, and
third-order false beliefs as well as of reciprocity, deception and
cheating detection. For each question answered correctly, one
point is obtained. The variables of interest in this study were ﬁrst-,
second-, and third-order false belief (scores 0 to 3) and Total ToM
(score 0–59).

Empathy
The Griﬃth Empathy Measure (GEM, Dadds et al., 2008) is a 23-
item parent-report questionnaire adapted from Bryant’s Index of
Empathy for Children and Adolescents (Bryant, 1982) in which
parents rate the empathetic abilities of their child on a 9-point
Likert scale from –4 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly agree). This
questionnaire provides three scores: Cognitive empathy (score –
56 to 56), Aﬀective empathy (score –68 to 68), and Total empathy
(score –92 to 92), with higher scores corresponding to higher
levels of empathy. Cognitive empathy can be deﬁned as “the
ability to intellectually take the role or perspective of another
person involving the ability to decode and label emotions and
their situational cues” (Dadds et al., 2008, p. 112). Aﬀective
empathy is deﬁned as “an aﬀective response more appropriate
to, or congruent with, someone else’s situation than to one’s own
situation” (Dadds et al., 2008, p. 112). The GEM has adequate
reliability and validity across gender and age (Dadds et al., 2008).
In line with Decety and Cowell (2014), the Aﬀective empathy
score was used as the main measure of empathy, whereas the total
and cognitive scores were used as complementary measures, in
order to distinguish the speciﬁc link of each aspect of empathy
with MR skills.

Affect Recognition
The Aﬀect Recognition subtest from the NEPSY-II (Korkman
et al., 2007) assesses children’s ability to recognize aﬀect from
pictures of children’s faces expressing one of ﬁve basic emotions
(happiness, sadness, anger, fear, disgust) or a neutral expression.
This 35-item task has four conditions increasing in diﬃculty
(number of distractors; score 0 to 35). The total number of
correct responses was used as the aﬀect recognition variable in
this study.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

4

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

Vera-Estay et al.

Social Cognition in Childhood

Moral Reasoning
The children’s version of the Socio-Moral Reasoning Aptitude
Level task (So-Moral-Child, Dooley et al., 2010; Beauchamp et al.,
2013) is a visual, computer-based task that presents nine moral
dilemmas speciﬁcally designed for children and has gender-
speciﬁc versions. Each dilemma (see example Figure 1) consists
of an introductory screen presenting the name of the dilemma
(e.g., teacher), three ﬁrst-person perspective pictures of children
actors playing out various social scenarios representing a conﬂict
centered on the moral domain (e.g., concerns with justice,
welfare/harm, and rights) according to Social Domain Theory
(Turiel, 1983), and a ﬁnal screen presenting a dichotomous
decision (e.g., whether or not to engage in a particular action,
such as stealing from a shop, cheating at a game, etc.). The
aggregate number of responses is compiled to obtain a moral
decision-making score, which ranges from 0 to 9 points. Children
are then asked to provide a justiﬁcation for their decision.
Each participant’s justiﬁcation is recorded verbatim and scored
using a standardized coding system (Beauchamp and Dooley,
2012) based on the cognitive-developmental approach to MR
(Kohlberg et al., 1983; Turiel, 1983; Gibbs, 2010). The moral
decision-making score does not aﬀect the moral justiﬁcation
score (both are independent). Developmental stages of MR have
been adapted to ﬁt the social nature of the dilemmas in the
So-Moral task and consist of the following: (1) Centrations
and authoritarian-based consequences; (2) Egocentric/pragmatic
exchanges; (3) Interpersonal Focus; (4) Societal Regulation; and
(5) Societal Evaluation (see Table 1). Transition stages (i.e., 1.5,
2.5, etc.) are used to account for answers that provide elements
of two consecutive reasoning stages. When elements of non-
consecutive stages are provided, the response is coded according
to the highest schema detected. The MR maturity score (0–45
points) is obtained by summing the nine justiﬁcation scores.
This test has adequate inter-rater reliability and construct validity
(Dooley et al., 2010). Each justiﬁcation was scored independently
by two trained raters (Intraclass correlation coeﬃcient = 0.81)
and discrepancies were resolved by discussion and consensus.
The MR maturity score was used as the main dependent variable.

Executive Functioning
Two tasks from the NEPSY-II battery (Korkman et al., 2007) and
one task from the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children –
Fourth Edition (WISC-IVCDN−F; Wechsler, 2005) were used
to measure three executive functions (attentional control,
inhibition, and verbal ﬂuency).

Attentional control
The WISC-IV Cancellation subtest was used to measure
children’s ability to direct their attention and resist distraction
during a goal-oriented task. Children are asked to detect and
mark objects belonging to the same category (i.e., animals) that
are mixed among distracters, within a speciﬁc time limit. The
raw total score of this task was used as the attentional control
variable.

Inhibition
The NEPSY-II Inhibition subtest, an adaptation of the widely
used Stroop task (Stroop, 1935/1992), assesses children’s
inhibition skills by using images (shapes and arrows) instead of
words. In the ﬁrst condition (Naming), children look at a series
of black and white shapes or arrows must name either the shapes
(circles or squares) or the direction of arrows (up or down) as
quickly as possible. In the second condition (Inhibition), children
must look at the same series of black and white shapes or
arrows, but must quickly name the opposite shapes or direction
of arrow. In the third condition (shifting), children must alternate
the response (same or opposite) depending on the color of the
shape or arrow. The raw completion time score of the inhibition
condition was used as the inhibition variable.

Verbal ﬂuency
The NEPSY-II Word generation subtest was used to assess
participants’ verbal ﬂuency. In this task, children are asked to
produce as many words as possible in 1 min, within a semantic
and a phonetic condition. The raw semantic score was used as
the verbal ﬂuency variable.

Statistical Analyses
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 21.0 software and
the PROCESS macro for mediation and moderation analysis
(Hayes, 2012, 2013). Prior to all statistical analyses, data were
examined for any violations of test assumptions (normality,
linearity, and homoscedasticity). Correlation coeﬃcients were
calculated to examine the relationship between MR maturity
and age, socioeconomic variables (family income, parental
education level, and a composite SES score including both
variables), EF variables (attentional control,
inhibition, and
verbal ﬂuency) and social cognition (ToM, empathy, and aﬀect
recognition). In order to examine the potential moderating
and mediating eﬀects of EF on the relationship between age
and MR skills, we performed moderation analyses with each
variable individually as potential moderators, and a parallel

FIGURE 1 | Example item from the So-Moral-Child task (Socio-Moral Reasoning Aptitude Level).

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

5

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

Vera-Estay et al.

Social Cognition in Childhood

TABLE 1 | Brief description of So-Moral coding and examples.

Level

Brief description

1

2

3

4

5

Moral justiﬁcations have an egocentric focus, which is based on obedience to higher authorities and
potential consequences of their actions for themselves (e.g., punishment). Thinking at this level is inﬂexible;
there is only one right/wrong way to act.
Moral justiﬁcations are based on a concept of pragmatic deals or exchanging favours with others (‘fair
deals’). Thinking is more ﬂexible and is determined by context. The correct option is the one that is right for
oneself (self-interest).
Moral justiﬁcations have a focus on interpersonal relationships, a sense of ‘good-ness’, and feelings such as
empathy and trust. Decisions are made with good motives and a prosocial perspective of the world.
Moral justiﬁcations start to incorporate a broader view of morality; based on the compliance with rules,
regulations and standards that society has established to ensure social order.
Moral justiﬁcations are characterized by the capacity to evaluate situations from various points of view to
identify values involved in the speciﬁc situation in order to make the fairest decision. Protection of
fundamental values and people’s rights is speciﬁc to this stage, even though these concepts are expressed
very concretely.

Example
• Because I could go to jail.

• Because I might need his/her help in the
future.

• Because he/she could get hurt.

• Because if everyone were to be unfaithful,
relationships would not have any meaning.
• Because people work hard for their things and
we should respect their belongings.

multiple mediation analysis with attentional control, inhibition
and verbal ﬂuency together as mediator variables, using the
PROCESS macro provided by Hayes (2012). To assess the
potential moderating and mediating eﬀect of social cognition
variables (aﬀect recognition and third-order false beliefs, the
ToM variable most correlated with MR) on the association
between age and MR skills, we performed moderation analyses
with each variable individually as a potential moderator, and a
parallel multiple mediation analysis with both variables as a set
of mediators. In mediation analyses, the statistical signiﬁcance of
the obtained regression coeﬃcients was determined by obtaining
a bias-corrected 95% conﬁdence interval by bootstrapping
based on 1,000 resamples. Finally, a three-step hierarchical
multiple regression analysis was conducted with age in the ﬁrst
step, the EF most strongly associated with MR (i.e., verbal
ﬂuency) in the second step and social cognition variables
that correlated with MR in the ﬁnal
to
explore the speciﬁc contribution of demographic, cognitive,
and socio-cognitive variables to MR maturity. Socioeconomic
variables were not
included in the models because they
were not related to either MR maturity or other measures
used in the study. Results corresponding to p < 0.05 were
considered statistically signiﬁcant. The strength of correlations
and eﬀect sizes were determined according to Cohen’s (1988)
criteria.

in order

step,

RESULTS

Descriptive Results
Participant demographic characteristics and participants’ results
on socioeconomic, cognitive, and socio-cognitive measures are
presented in Tables 2 and 3.

Association of Moral Reasoning Maturity
with Socioeconomic Factors
Moral reasoning maturity was not related to socioeconomic
variables including family income and maternal and paternal
education level (see Table 3).

Association of Moral Reasoning Maturity
with Age, Executive Functioning, and
Social Cognition
As shown in Table 3, MR maturity was strongly and directly
associated with age (r = 0.54 p < 0.001). In terms of EF,
there was a moderate signiﬁcant relationship between MR
maturity and inhibition, as well as verbal ﬂuency, and a
small but signiﬁcant relationship between MR and attentional
control. Concerning social cognition variables, MR maturity was
moderately associated with total ToM and higher order ToM, as
well as with aﬀect recognition, but it was not associated with ﬁrst-
order false beliefs. Aﬀective empathy, our main empathy variable,
as well as total empathy, were not associated with MR skills, but
cognitive empathy approached signiﬁcance (r = 0.22 p = 0.054).
Age and Moral Reasoning Maturity: The
Moderating and Mediating Role of EF
the moderation analyses performed using the
Results of
PROCESS macro detected no signiﬁcant interactions of age X
attentional control, (b = –0.0009, 95% CI [–0.0016 –0.0033],
t = 0.7155, p = 0.48); inhibition (b = –0.0001, 95% CI [–
0.0031 –0.0029], t = –0.0671, p = 0.95) and verbal ﬂuency
(b = –0.0014, 95% CI [–0.0068 –0.0040], t = –0.5167, p = 0.61)
on MR maturity,
these EF do not play a
signiﬁcant moderating role in the relationship between age and
MR maturity.

indicating that

Table 4 displays the bootstrapped estimates for the total
and speciﬁc indirect eﬀects obtained from multiple mediation
analysis. The total indirect eﬀect of age on MR skills through EF
variables as a group was not statistically signiﬁcant, as the 95%
conﬁdence intervals contained zero. Considering the possibility
of having signiﬁcant speciﬁc indirect eﬀects in the absence of a
signiﬁcant total indirect eﬀect (Preacher and Hayes, 2008), we
evaluated the speciﬁc indirect eﬀects associated with each of the
three mediators, detecting a signiﬁcant mediating role for verbal
ﬂuency on the link between age and MR skills. To assess the
eﬀect size of verbal ﬂuency as a mediator, we performed a simple
mediator model. The indirect eﬀect of verbal ﬂuency obtained
was statistically signiﬁcant (b= 0.041, 95% CI[0.0013 0.0890]), as

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

6

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

Vera-Estay et al.

Social Cognition in Childhood

TABLE 2 | Sociodemographic characteristics of the participants.

Variable

Frequency

%

Gender
Male
Female
Ethnic origin
White
Hispanic
African–American
Total gross annual household income (CAN $)
Below 20 000 $
20 000 through 39 000 $
40 000 through 59 000 $
60 000 through 79 000 $
80 000 through 99 000 $
100 000 $ and more
SES on the basis of the annual household income1
High SES
Middle SES
Low SES
Maternal education
Master’s degree
Bachelor’s degree
College
High school graduate
Incomplete high school
Paternal education
Doctoral degree
Master’s degree
Bachelor’s degree
College
High school graduate
Incomplete high school
Missing values

36
40

72
2
2

4
12
17
22
16
5

5
54
16

1
10
29
28
8

1
2
4
15
35
16
3

1 Statistics Canada, 2015.

52.6
47.4

94.7
2.6
2.6

5.3
15.8
22.4
28.9
21.1
6.6

6.6
72.4
21.1

1.3
13.2
38.2
36.8
10.5

1.3
2.6
5.3
19.7
46.1
21.1
3.9

the conﬁdence intervals do not contain zero. The Kelley–Kappa
squared obtained (κ2; Hayes, 2013) indicates an eﬀect size of 0.15,
which is considered a medium eﬀect according to Preacher and
Kelley (2011), based on Cohen’s (1988) criteria.

Age and Moral Reasoning Maturity: The
Moderating and Mediating Role of Social
Cognition
Results of the moderation analyses also detected non-signiﬁcant
interactions of age X Third-order false beliefs (b = –0.0483,
95% CI [–0.1080 –0.0114], t = –1.6131, p = 0.11) and aﬀect
recognition (b = –0.0011, 95% CI [–0.0089 –0.0111], t = 0.2141,
p = 0.83) on MR maturity, indicating that social cognition
variables do not moderate the relationship between age and
MR maturity. Table 4 displays the bootstrapped estimates for
the total and speciﬁc indirect eﬀects obtained from multiple
mediation analysis. The total indirect eﬀect of age on MR skills
through third-order false beliefs and aﬀect recognition as a set
was statistically signiﬁcant, as the conﬁdence intervals do not

contain zero. The speciﬁc indirect eﬀect of each variable was
evaluated, detecting a signiﬁcant mediating role of third-order
false beliefs on the link between age and MR skills. The eﬀect size
of third-order beliefs as mediators was also assessed performing a
simple mediator model. The results indicate a signiﬁcant indirect
eﬀect (b = 0.0224, 95% CI [0.0041 –0.0571]) with a medium eﬀect
size (κ2 = 0.09).

Contribution of Demographic, EF, and
Socio-Cognitive Variables to Moral
Reasoning Maturity
As shown in Table 5, a three-level hierarchical multiple regression
indicates that in Step 1, age contributed signiﬁcantly to the
regression model, F(1,73) = 28.129, p < 0.001 and accounted
for 28% of the variation in MR maturity, with a large eﬀect size
(f 2 = 0.37). Introducing verbal ﬂuency to the model explained
an additional 5% of variation in MR scores and the change in R2
was signiﬁcant, F change (1,72) = 5.571, p = 0.021. Together, age
and verbal ﬂuency explained 33% of MR scores (F(2,72)= 17.731,
p < 0.001), which corresponds to a large eﬀect (f 2 = 0.49).
Finally, the addition of social cognition variables (third-order
false beliefs and aﬀect recognition) to the regression model
explained an additional 6% of the variation in MR maturity and
the change in R2 was also signiﬁcant, F(2,70) = 3.426, p = 0.038.
Together, age, verbal ﬂuency, third-order false beliefs and aﬀect
recognition explained 39% of MR scores [F(4,70) = 11.176,
p < 0.001], which corresponds to a large eﬀect (f 2 = 0.64).
When social cognition variables were included in step 3 of the
regression model, verbal ﬂuency (β= 0.24, 0.041) and third-order
false beliefs (β = 0.22, p = 0.030) were signiﬁcant, independent
predictors of MR maturity.

DISCUSSION

This study explored the relationship between demographic
factors, EF, social cognition, and children’s moral maturity, as well
as the independent and combined contribution of these variables
to MR.

While several studies have found a link between demographic
factors, such as maternal education and SES, and moral processes
(Dunn et al., 2000; Arsenio and Gold, 2006; Hinnant et al.,
2013), others have not reported such an association (Caravita
et al., 2012; Vera-Estay et al., 2014). In the current study,
neither the SES composite z-score, nor parental education and
income individually were associated with children’ MR skills.
This discrepancy in results may be due to population diﬀerences
and the relatively high-level of SES in the current sample and
absence of any real social risk. Despite adequate variability in
family income in our sample, 98% of the mothers of participants
had at least some high school education, possibly oﬀ-setting
the adverse eﬀects of low SES, and contrasting with studies
in extremely disadvantaged children (e.g., Arsenio and Gold,
2006). In addition, methodological diﬀerences could contribute
to explaining the lack of association between SES and MR in this
study. Parental education is known to be linked to child academic

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

7

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

Vera-Estay et al.

Social Cognition in Childhood

TABLE 3 | Main descriptive results and correlations of the study.

Variable

M

SD

Correlation

MR maturity

Age

SES composite

0.54∗∗∗

− 0.13
− 0.13
− 0.09
− 0.04

− 0.02

1
0.73∗∗∗
0.74∗∗
0.61∗∗∗

0.75
1
1
1

9.9
21.1
9.3
26.0

− 0.03

0
0
0

108.6
82.5
30.3
74.9

1

− 0.02
− 0.05
0.08
− 0.11

Age in months
Socioeconomic variables
SES composite z-score
Annual Household income z-score
Maternal education z-score
Paternal education z-score
Cognitive variables
Intellectual functioning (WASI IQ)
Attentional controla
Verbal ﬂuencyb
Inhibitionc
Socio-cognitive variables
Affect recognitiond
Empathy (total score)e
Cognitive empathyf
Affective empathyg
Theory of Mindh
First-order false beliefsi
Second-order false beliefsj
Third-order false beliefsk
Moral reasoningl
∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001. aWISC-IV Cancelation raw total score; bNEPSY-II Word generation raw semantic score; cNEPSY-II Inhibition raw completion
time score; dNEPSY-II Affect Recognition raw total score; eGrifﬁth Empathy Measure total score; fGrifﬁth Empathy Measure Cognitive empathy score; gGrifﬁth Empathy
Measure Affective empathy score; hTheory of Mind Picture Stories total score; iTheory of Mind Picture Stories First-order false beliefs score; jTheory of Mind Picture
Stories task Second-order false beliefs score; kTheory of Mind Picture Stories task Third-order false beliefs score; lSo-Moral, total justiﬁcation score.

0.54∗∗∗
0.34∗∗
0.32∗∗
0.29∗
0.44∗∗∗
0.27∗
0.40∗∗
0.36∗∗
0.56

− 0.22
− 0.09
− 0.10
− 0.07
− 0.08
− 0.05
− 0.08
− 0.03
− 0.13

0.42∗∗∗
0.21
0.22
0.19
0.32∗∗
0.11
0.26∗
0.40∗∗∗

25.1
33.2
25.5
23.8
48.7
2.7
2.1
1.9
18.3

4.6
23.4
14.2
18.8
7.8
0.6
0.9
1.0
5.3

0.17
0.36∗∗
0.49∗∗∗
− 0.43∗∗∗

0.16
0.64∗∗∗
0.58∗∗∗
− 0.66∗∗∗

0.03
0.05
− 0.19

competence, including reading and writing skills (Bradley and
Corwyn, 2002; Janus and Duku, 2007; Hooper et al., 2010), yet
the So-Moral task was speciﬁcally designed to remove the need
for reading and writing for successful performance (Dooley et al.,
2010), therefore potentially eliminating the association between
parental education and MR. Further studies with a larger sample
and greater SES and social risk variability may be necessary to
clarify the exact role of parental education and SES on MR.

and

2013)

recent

studies

(Gibbs,

On the other hand, consistent with cognitive-developmental
theories
combining
neurophysiological and behavioral measures (Decety et al., 2012),
the current results conﬁrm the positive association between age
and MR skills suggesting an evolution of these during the
transitional period from childhood to pre-adolescence,
in
line with the results obtained in our study with early to late
adolescents using the So-Moral task (Vera-Estay et al., 2014).

This developmental tendency may be explained by diﬀerences
in biological and cognitive maturity, but also by increased
social experience and opportunities for social perspective taking.
During the school years, children participate actively in the
construction of social relationships and learn to adjust their
behavior in order to be integrated in the community, especially in
peer groups. With age, children learn to integrate and coordinate
social and moral knowledge (Killen and Rutland, 2011), but this
progressive process is inﬂuenced by the control of egocentric
bias in order to consider other’s perspectives (Gibbs, 2013). In

our study, younger children tended to justify moral decisions
on the basis of egocentric and concrete reasons such as obeying
authority (e.g., parents, teacher), avoiding punishment, and
obtaining direct personal beneﬁts, whereas older children more
frequently incorporated a socio-centric focus in their reasoning,
including aspects such as empathy toward the victim, caring
and maintaining interpersonal relationship, and more abstract
concepts such as mutual respect, reciprocity, and responsibility.
Despite the age-related tendency of MR skills in typically
developing children, age alone was not suﬃcient to explain
individual diﬀerences in MR. We therefore explored associations
with other cognitive and socio-emotional factors in order to shed
light on the building blocks of MR.

Moral Reasoning and Executive
Functioning
Concerning the cognitive factors related to MR skills, three
aspects of EF (attentional control, inhibition, and verbal ﬂuency)
had a small to moderate association with MR skills, with verbal
ﬂuency having the strongest association. Globally, these results
are in line with previous research investigating the contribution
of EF to social adaptation (Kochanska et al., 2000; Eisenberg
et al., 2004; Martel et al., 2007; Beauchamp and Anderson, 2010;
Miller and Hinshaw, 2010) and moral understanding (Decety and
Howard, 2013), as well as with our previous study which found a
positive link between MR and several EF (conceptual reasoning,

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

8

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

Vera-Estay et al.

Social Cognition in Childhood

TABLE 4 | Indirect effects of age on MR skills via EF and social cognition.

Mediator

Bootstrap
estimate

SE

BC 95%
CI lower

BC 95%
CI upper

Model 1 EF
Attention control
Inhibition
Verbal ﬂuency
Total indirect effect
Model 2 social cognition
Affect recognition
Third-order false beliefs
Total indirect effect

–0.0079
0.0148
0.0336
0.0465

0.0272
0.0223
0.0485

0.0212
0.0250
0.0216
0.0299

0.0146
0.0131
0.0179

–0.0498
–0.0336
0.0030
–0.0148

–0.0043
0.0044
0.0195

0.0352
0.0638
0.0887
0.1075

0.0560
0.0574
0.0923

Based on 1,000 bootstrap samples. BC, bias corrected; CI, conﬁdence interval.

TABLE 5 | Contribution of demographic variables, EF, and social cognition
to moral reasoning maturity.

Predictor

MR Maturity

Step 1

Age

Step 2

Age
Verbal ﬂuency

Step 3

Age
Verbal ﬂuency
Affect recognition
Third-order false beliefs

Total R2

n
∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.001.

R2
0.28∗∗∗

0.05∗

0.06∗

0.39∗
76

β

0.53∗∗∗

0.37∗
0.28∗

0.23
0.24∗
0.16
0.22∗

cognitive ﬂexibility, verbal ﬂuency, and feedback utilization), in
addition to the independent contribution of cognitive ﬂexibility
and verbal ﬂuency to MR maturity (Vera-Estay et al., 2014).

The relationship between attentional control and MR skills
highlights the importance of directing, focusing and maintaining
attention on relevant stimuli during social situations. Whereas
paying attention to social clues is considered the ﬁrst step in
social understanding according to Crick and Dodge’s (1994)
Social Information Processing Model, this result suggests that
this skill is also speciﬁcally related to better MR. Thus, detecting
the relevant information contained in the So-Moral task (as in
everyday life) requires individuals to focus on the story, control
environmental, and internal distractors, and pay attention to
subtle visual details, in order to accurately interpret the situation
that will then be evaluated according to moral processes.

Inhibition skills were also related to more mature MR. This
result is consistent with Barkley’s (1997) established ADHD
model, which depicts inhibition as a pivotal skill for adequate
self-regulation and social adaptation, one which sustains high
order socio-cognitive processes, such as social perspective taking,
internalization of speech and MR. In the same vein, Birch and

Bloom (2004) have underscored the role of inhibition in cognitive
perspective taking, speciﬁcally false belief understanding, since
it requires the capacity to control and suspend automatized
subjective points of view,
in order to think about other’s
mental states and knowledge. During MR, inhibiting one’s own
point of view in favor of taking another’s perspective could
enable people to distinguish between intentional and involuntary
harm, or suspend the analysis of personal beneﬁts/costs in a
moral decision in order to evaluate the potential eﬀects of
these decisions on other people. Besides, inhibition skills work
together with attentional control during the encoding step of the
Social Information Processing Model, helping to control for the
inﬂuence of distractive or irrelevant stimuli and stop disruptive
behaviors, in order to focus on signiﬁcant social and moral
cues. Of note, the ﬁnding of a signiﬁcant association between
attentional/inhibitory skills and moral maturity suggests that
future work should investigate the quality of MR in children
presenting deﬁcits in these areas, such as those with ADHD.

The inﬂuence of inhibition on internalization of speech, verbal
ﬂuency, and MR proposed by Barkley (1997) is also consistent
with our ﬁnding concerning the positive link between verbal
ﬂuency and MR skills. Indeed, the ability to rapidly access
vocabulary may favor inner speech ﬂuency and consequently
the MR process, considered as an inner moral dialog in which
social situations are evaluated in light of moral criteria (Tappan,
1997). Discussions of moral issues with peers (Berkowitz and
Gibbs, 1983; Walker et al., 2000) and parents (Walker and Taylor,
1991; Walker et al., 2000) have been shown to be pivotal in MR
development, further underscoring the importance of ﬂuid verbal
skills. Therefore, besides the potential inﬂuence of verbal ﬂuency
on the internal MR process, this EF may also support the exercise
of MR skills in social contexts fostering active participation in
moral dialogs and debate with others.

Moral Reasoning and Socio-Cognitive
Skills
This study also investigated the relationship between MR and
three important socio-cognitive skills in maturation during
childhood: aﬀect recognition, empathy, and ToM.

Facial emotional expressions are powerful clues for an
adequate understanding of moral situations, since they inform
the internal aﬀective state of the actors involved. However,
traditional written MR tasks do not oﬀer this basic source
of information. Taking to account this limitation, our study
measured MR with a visual task including pictures or real child
actors in which facial emotional expressions reﬂect the moral
situation played out, and included an aﬀect recognition task
developed for the pediatric population. Using this approach,
we found that children who are better at recognizing emotions
had more mature levels of MR, conﬁrming the importance of
emotional information for a deeper comprehension of moral
issues. This result is consistent with previous research relating
deﬁcits in facial aﬀect recognition with psychopathy in youth
and adult oﬀenders (Hastings et al., 2008; Bowen et al., 2014),
as well as in children with psychopathic tendencies (Blair et al.,
2001a; Stevens et al., 2001). Along with the association of MR

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

9

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

Vera-Estay et al.

Social Cognition in Childhood

with both attentional control and inhibition skills, the link
between aﬀect recognition and MR skills is a novel and interesting
ﬁnding that highlights the role of encoding cues on high-order
social cognition, namely, MR skills. While attentional control
and inhibition support the encoding process, facial emotional
expressions play the role of content or relevant clue to be
encoded. The aptitude to distinguish these emotions fosters the
second step of social information processing (Crick and Dodge,
1994), i.e., the interpretation of the encoded cues, providing rich
information to infer more complex mental states to the actors
involved in a given social situation (e.g., he is sad to have been
rejected by a friend).

Contrary to our hypothesis, children’s aﬀective empathy, as
reported by their parents, was not related to their MR skills.
While unexpected, this result is, however, in keeping with Decety
and Cowell (2015)’s claims that empathy does not always lead to
moral behavior and could sometimes aﬀect the objectivity of MR.
In children, aﬀective empathy may, for instance, push them to
protect a child from being bullied, but may also induce in-group
bias justifying immoral behaviors in order to protect or help
friends, interfering in the analysis of the consequences on other
actors in the situation. The impact of in-group bias in children’s
moral evaluations has also been demonstrated in a recent study
of children aged 3–9 years, who considered within-group harm
as wrong regardless of explicit rules, but between-group harm
as wrong when explicit rules are present (Rhodes and Chalik,
2013). Thus, mature MR skills may help children to analyze
the situation and expand their concern beyond spontaneous and
evolutionarily older mechanisms such as kin-care and in-group
bias, to humanity as a whole. Perspective-taking skills have a
key role in reducing group partiality and upholding the global
application of moral values (Decety and Cowell, 2015).

In line with this view, our study also found that ToM skills, in
general, as well as higher-order levels of false belief understanding
are associated with better MR skills. However, whereas basic
understanding of other’s minds (ﬁrst-order false beliefs) was not
associated with MR, more complex understanding represented
by second-order and third-order false beliefs (e.g., “What does
the boy expect the girl thinks he wants to do?”) was related to
better MR skills in childhood. Third-order false beliefs support
theoretical reasoning about intentions, lies, cheating, deception,
and so on. Hence, along with aﬀect recognition, third-order false
belief theoretically contribute to MR processing in the second
step of social information processing (Crick and Dodge, 1994),
sustaining the interpretation of cues in order to evaluate the
moral situation, in addition to being the cognitive basis of social
perspective taking.

Age and Moral Reasoning Maturity: The
Moderating and Mediating Role of EF
and Social Cognition
As described above, while the association between age and MR
maturity has been documented theoretically and empirically
(Decety et al., 2012; Gibbs, 2013), the multiple factors inﬂuencing
this developmental trend continue to be explored. The second
and third aims of this study were to investigate to what extent the

link between age and MR maturity was moderated or mediated
by EF and social cognition. According to our results and contrary
to our hypothesis, neither EF nor social cognition variables
moderated the eﬀect of age on MR maturity. This result suggests
that, in healthy children, variations in EF and social cognition do
not aﬀect the magnitude of the relationship between age and MR
skills. Further research including children with EF and/or social
cognition deﬁcits are necessary to determine the generalizability
of the results. On the other hand, verbal ﬂuency and third-
order false beliefs had a moderating role in this link, in line
with cognitive-developmental views of MR, suggesting that the
development of speciﬁc thinking processes related to internal
speech and perspective taking help to explain the increase in
moral maturity with age.

In light of growing societal

concern regarding the
consequences of children’s behaviors, such as bullying and
peer exclusion, for both victims and victimizers, it is necessary
to create eﬀective strategies to foster appropriate MR skills
at an early age. Understanding the mediators of the eﬀect
of age on MR contributes to this challenge and provides a
starting point for developing targeted intervention programs
for the improvement of social skills in both typically developing
and clinical populations. The results obtained here provide
direction for such programs, particularly considering that both
verbal ﬂuency and ToM have the potential to be targeted in
socio-cognitive intervention programs.

Combined Contributions of
Demographic, Executive Functioning,
and Social Cognition to Moral Reasoning
The fourth aim of this study was to investigate the relative
and combined contributions of age, EF, and socio-cognitive
variables to children’s MR skills. To enhance power, the three-step
hierarchical regression conducted included the variables most
correlated with MR skills (i.e., age, verbal ﬂuency, third-order
false beliefs, and aﬀect recognition).

Together these factors explained 39% of the variation in
children’s MR skills, each domain making an independent
contribution. As expected in a sample of healthy children, the
contribution of age (introduced in ﬁrst step) had a large eﬀect
on MR scores, supporting the cognitive-developmental approach
of morality (Gibbs, 2013) and in line with studies demonstrating
that developmental disorders may interfere with this age trend
(Anderson et al., 1999; Blair et al., 2001b; Couper et al., 2002;
Dooley et al., 2010; Beauchamp et al., 2013). The addition of
verbal ﬂuency (added in the second step) had a small but
signiﬁcant independent contribution to MR scores, as well as
third-order false beliefs and aﬀect recognition (added in the
third step). In the ﬁnal model, children’s verbal ﬂuency and their
ability to understand third-order false beliefs were independent
predictors of MR maturity. The current study indicates that
these two skills, theoretically at the core of MR, are not only
associated with MR skills, but also serve as cognitive predictors
in healthy children, suggesting that subtle variations in these
skills may have an impact on the MR process. Considering that
EF and social cognition are impaired in several developmental

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

10

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

Vera-Estay et al.

Social Cognition in Childhood

disorders of childhood aﬀecting social understanding, such as
autism spectrum disorder and attention deﬁcit hyperactivity
disorder (Korkmaz, 2011), this study provides strong support for
investigating MR processes in such groups.

Strengths and Limitations
This study provides novel information about the contribution of
socio-cognitive building blocks of children’s MR skills, on the
basis of the results of an ecological approach to the measurement
of MR for pediatric populations. Our sample has an adequate
balance concerning the sex and age of the participants, which
enhances generalization of the results. Moreover, the results
obtained with healthy children shed light on potential
loci
of intervention for children at-risk for socially maladaptive
behaviors. However, the present study has some limitations that
need to be taken into account. First, MR is a higher-order
human skill inﬂuenced by multiple interactive factors. Many of
these were taken into account here in one of the few studies to
explore their combined contribution; however, a modest sample
size limited inclusion of additional environmental, cultural,
and individual variables (including other EF) that could also
contribute to MR. These could be explored in a larger sample,
with more variability in terms of maternal education, SES and
ethnicity, in order to build an even more comprehensive view
of moral development. Although a strength of the study was
that it relied on direct neuropsychological measures, empathy
was assessed using a parent-report questionnaire, which may

have introduced bias. Direct observations of children’ empathetic
skills/behaviors could better estimate their relationship with MR.
Finally, whereas our study observed age diﬀerences in MR skills
in a cross-sectional design, further studies using a longitudinal
design could more accurately explore the progression of MR
during childhood and infer causal relationships between the
variables explored.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

All authors contributed to study conception and design. EV-E
and MB contributed to the development of the study hypotheses.
Testing and data collection were performed by EV-E, AS, and
CC. EV performed the data analysis and interpretation under the
supervision of MB. EV-E drafted the manuscript with input from
MB. MB, AS, and CC provided critical revisions. All authors read
and approved the ﬁnal version of the manuscript for submission.

FUNDING

This study was funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada and a scholarship to EV-E from the
Government of Chile (CONICYT). The funding body was not
involved in the study design, collection, analysis or interpretation
of data, nor in the writing of the manuscript and the decision to
submit the article for publication.

REFERENCES
Anderson, S. W., Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., and Damasio, A.
(1999). Impairment of social and moral behavior related to early damage
in human prefrontal cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 1032–1037. doi: 10.1038/
14833

Arsenio, W. F., and Gold,

injustice and
inequality on children’s moral
a
theoretical model. Cogn. Dev. 21, 388–400. doi: 10.1016/j.cogdev.2006.
06.005

J. (2006). The eﬀects of social

and behavior:

judgments

towards

Baird, J., and Astington, J. W. (2004). The role of mental state understanding in the
development of moral cognition and moral action. New Dir. Child Adolesc. Dev.
103, 37–49. doi: 10.1002/cd.96

Barkley, R. A. (1997). Behavioral inhibition, sustained attention, and executive
functions: constructing a unifying theory of ADHD. Psychol. Bull. 121, 65–94.
doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.121.1.65

Beauchamp, M. H., and Anderson, V. (2010). SOCIAL: an integrative framework
for the development of social skills. Psychol. Bull. Am. Psychol. Assoc. 136,
39–64.

Beauchamp, M. H., and Dooley, J. J. (2012). Administration and Coding Manual
SocioMoral Reasoning Aptitude Level Task (So Moral). Montreal, QC: ABCs
Laboratory.

Beauchamp, M. H., Dooley, J. J., and Anderson, V. (2013). A preliminary
investigation of moral reasoning and empathy after traumatic brain injury
in adolescents. Brain Injury 27, 896–902. doi: 10.3109/02699052.2013.
775486

Bechi, M., Riccaboni, R., Ali, S., Fresi, F., Buonocore, M., Bosia, M., et al.
(2012). Theory of mind and emotion processing training for patients
with schizophrenia: preliminary ﬁndings. Psychiatry Res. 198, 371–377. doi:
10.1016/j.psychres.2012.02.004

Berkowitz, M. W., and Gibbs, J. C. (1983). Measuring the developmental features

of moral discussion. Merrill Palmer Q. 29, 399–410.

Birch, S. A., and Bloom, P. (2004). Understanding children’s and adults’
limitations in mental state reasoning. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 255–260. doi:
10.1016/j.tics.2004.04.011

Blair, R. J. R., Colledge, E., Murray, L., and Mitchell, D. G. (2001a). A selective
impairment in the processing of sad and fearful expressions in children
with psychopathic tendencies. J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. 29, 491–498. doi:
10.1023/A:1012277125119

Blair, R. J. R., Monson, J., and Frederickson, N. (2001b). Moral reasoning and
conduct problems in children with emotional and behavioural diﬃculties. Pers.
Individ. Diﬀer. 31, 799–811. doi: 10.1016/S0191-8869(00)00181-1

Bowen, K. L., Morgan, J. E., Moore, S. C., and van Goozen, S. H. (2014).
Young Oﬀenders’ emotion recognition dysfunction across emotion intensities:
explaining variation using psychopathic traits, conduct disorder and oﬀense
severity. J. Psychopathol. Behav. Assess. 36, 60–73. doi: 10.1007/s10862-013-
9368-z

Bryant, B. K. (1982). An index of empathy for children and adolescents. Child Dev.

53, 413–425. doi: 10.2307/1128984

Caravita, S. C., Giardino, S., Lenzi, L., Salvaterra, M., and Antonietti, A.
(2012). Socio-economic factors related to moral reasoning in childhood and
adolescence: the missing link between brain and behavior. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 6:262. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00262

Carlson, S. M., and Moses, L. J. (2001). Individual diﬀerences in inhibitory control
and children’s theory of mind. Child Dev. 72, 1032–1053. doi: 10.1111/1467-
8624.00333

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, 2nd Edn.

Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

child

Bradley, R. H.,

and Corwyn, R.

F.
development. Annu. Rev.

and
10.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.135233
(2005). Emotion recognition,
in

Brune, M.
behavior
schizophrenia.
10.1016/j.psychres.2004.10.007

Psychiatry

(2002).
Psychol.

Socioeconomic

53,

371–399.

status
doi:

‘theory of mind,’

Res.

133,

and social
doi:

135–147.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

11

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

Vera-Estay et al.

Social Cognition in Childhood

Decety, J., and Lamm, C. (2006). Human empathy through the lens of social

Case of Face Recognition. Oxford: Blackwell.

Couper, E., Jacobs, R., and Anderson, V. (2002). Adaptive behaviour and moral
reasoning in children with frontal lobe lesions. Brain Impairment 3, 105–113.
doi: 10.1375/brim.3.2.105

Crick, N., and Dodge, K. (1994). A review and reformulation of social information-
processing mechanisms in children’s social adjustment. Psychol. Bull. 115,
74–101. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.115.1.74

Cui, L., Colasante, T., Malti, T., Ribeaud, D., and Eisner, M. P. (2015). Dual
trajectories of reactive and proactive aggression from mid-childhood to early
adolescence: relations to sensation seeking, risk taking, and moral reasoning.
J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. doi: 10.1007/s10802-015-0079-7 [Epub ahead of
print].

Cushman, F., Sheketoﬀ, R., Wharton, S., and Carey, S.

(2013). The
judgment. Cognition 127, 6–21. doi:

development of
10.1016/j.cognition.2012.11.008

intent-based moral

Dadds, M. R., Hunter, K., Hawes, D. J., Frost, A. D., Vassallo, S., Bunn, P., et al.
(2008). A measure of cognitive and aﬀective empathy in children using parent
ratings. Child Psychiatry Hum. Dev. 39, 111–122. doi: 10.1007/s10578-007-
0075-4

Daniel, E., Dys, S. P., Buchmann, M., and Malti, T. (2014). Developmental relations
between sympathy, moral emotion attributions, moral reasoning, and social
justice values from childhood to early adolescence. J. Adolesc. 37, 1201–1214.
doi: 10.1016/j.adolescence.2014.08.009

Decety, J., and Cowell, J. M. (2014). The complex relation between morality and

empathy. Trends Cogn. Sci. 18, 337–339. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2014.04.008

Decety, J., and Cowell, J. M. (2015). “The equivocal relationship between Morality
and Empathy,” in The Moral Brain : A Multidisciplinary Perspective, eds J.
Decety and T. Wheatley (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press), 279–302.

Decety, J., and Howard, L. H. (2013). The role of aﬀect in the neurodevelopment of

morality. Child Dev. Perspect. 7, 49–54. doi: 10.1111/cdep.12020

neuroscience. Sci. World J. 6, 1146–1163. doi: 10.1100/tsw.2006.221

Decety, J., Michalska, K. J., and Kinzler, K. D. (2012). The contribution of emotion
and cognition to moral sensitivity: a neurodevelopmental study. Cereb. Cortex
22, 209–220. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr111

Devine, R. T., and Hughes, C. (2014). Relations between false belief understanding
and executive function in early childhood: a meta-analysis. Child Dev. 85,
1777–1794. doi: 10.1111/cdev.12237

Dooley, J. J., Beauchamp, M. H., and Anderson, V. (2010). The measurement
of sociomoral reasoning in adolescents with traumatic brain injury: a pilot
investigation. Brain Impairment 11, 152–161. doi: 10.1375/brim.11.2.152

Dumontheil, I., Apperly, I. A., and Blakemore, S.-J. (2010). Online usage of theory
of mind continues to develop in late adolescence. Dev. Sci. 13, 331–338. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00888.x

Dunn,

J., Cutting, A. L., and Demetriou, H.

sensibility,
understanding others, and children’s friendship interactions in the preschool
period. Br. J. Dev. Psychol. 18, 159–177. doi: 10.1348/026151000165625

(2000). Moral

Eisenberg, N. (2003). “Prosocial behavior, empathy, and sympathy,” in Well-Being:
Positive Development Across the Life Course, eds M. H. Bornstein, L. Davidson,
C. L. M. Keyes, and K. A. Moore (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Publishers), 253–265.

Eisenberg, N., and Fabes, R. A. (1990). Empathy: conceptualization, measurement,
and relation to prosocial behavior. Motiv. Emot. 14, 131–149. doi:
10.1007/BF00991640

Eisenberg, N., Guthrie, I. K., Cumberland, A., Murphy, B. C., Shepard, S. A.,
Zhou, Q., et al. (2002). Prosocial development in early adulthood: a longitudinal
study. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 82, 993–1006. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.82.6.993

Eisenberg, N., and Mussen, P.

(1978). Empathy and moral development
in adolescence. Dev. Psychol. 14, 185–186. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.
14.2.185

Eisenberg, N., Spinrad, T. L., Fabes, R. A., Reiser, M., Cumberland, A., Shepard,
S. A., et al. (2004). The relations of eﬀortful control and impulsivity to
children’s resiliency and adjustment. Child Dev. 75, 25–46. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-
8624.2004.00652.x

Gibbs, J. C. (2010). Moral Development & Reality: Beyond the Theories of Kohlberg

and Hoﬀman, 2nd Edn. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Gibbs, J. C. (2013). Moral Development and Reality: Beyond the Theories of
Kohlberg, Hoﬀman, and Haidt, 3rd Edn. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.

Haidt, J., Koller, S. H., and Dias, M. G. (1993). Aﬀect, culture, and morality, or is
it wrong to eat your dog? J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 65, 613–628. doi: 10.1037/0022-
3514.65.4.613

Hastings, M. E., Tangney, J. P., and Stuewig, J. (2008). Psychopathy and
Identiﬁcation of Facial Expressions of Emotion. Pers. Individ. Diﬀer. 44, 1474–
1483. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2008.01.004

Hayes, A. F. (2012). PROCESS: A Versatile Computational Tool for Observed
Variable Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional Process Modeling [White
paper]. Available at: http://www.afhayes.com/public/process2012.pdf

Hayes, A. F. (2013). Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional
Process Analysis: A Regression-Based Approach. New York, NY: The Guilford
Press.

Herba, C. M., Landau, S., Russell, T., Ecker, C., and Phillips, M. L. (2006).
The development of emotion-processing in children: eﬀects of age, emotion,
and intensity. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 47, 1098–1106. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-
7610.2006.01652.x

Hinnant, J. B., Nelson, J. A., O’Brien, M., Keane, S. P., and Calkins, S. D. (2013). The
interactive roles of parenting, emotion regulation and executive functioning
in moral reasoning during middle childhood. Cogn. Emot. 27, 1460–1468. doi:
10.1080/02699931.2013.789792

Hoﬀman, M. L. (2000). Empathy and Moral Development : Implications for Caring

and Justice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hooper, S. R., Roberts, J. E., Nelson, L., Zeisel, S., and Kasambira Fannin, D. (2010).
Preschool predictors of narrative writing skills in elementary school children.
Sch. Psychol. Q. 25, 1–12. doi: 10.1037/a0018329

Janus, M., and Duku, E. (2007). The school entry gap: socioeconomic, family, and
health factors associated with children’s school readiness to learn. Early Educ.
Dev. 18, 375–403. doi: 10.1080/10409280701610796a

Johnson, M. H., and Morton, J. (1991). Biology and Cognitive Development: the

Kerr, A., and Zelazo, P. D. (2004). Development of "hot" executive function:
the children’s gambling task. Brain Cogn. 55, 148–157. doi: 10.1016/S0278-
2626(03)00275-6

Killen, M., Mulvey, K. L., Richardson, C., and Jampol, N. (2011). The accidental
transgressor: morally relevant theory of mind. Cognition 119, 197–215. doi:
10.1016/j.cognition.2011.01.006

Killen, M., and Rutland, A. (2011). The Emergence of Morality in Childhood
Children and Social Exclusion: Morality, Prejudice, and Group Identity (Malden,
MA: Wiley-Blackwell), 9–36.

Kochanska, G., Murray, K. T., and Harlan, E. T. (2000). Eﬀortful control in
early childhood: continuity and change, antecedents, and implications for
social development. Dev. Psychol. 36, 220–232. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.36.
2.220

Kohlberg, L., Levine, C., and Hewer, A. (1983). Moral Stages: a Current Formulation

and a Response to Critics. Basel. New York, NY: Karger Publishers.

Korkman, M., Kirk, U., and Kemp, S. L. (2007). NEPSY II. Clinical and

Tnterpretative Manual. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.

Korkmaz, B. (2011). Theory of mind and neurodevelopmental disorders of
childhood. Pediatr. Res. 69(Pt 2), 101R–108R. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013
e318212c177

Kretschmer, A., Lampmann, S.-A., and Altgassen, M. (2014). Relations between
moral reasoning,
theory of mind and executive functions in children
with autism spectrum disorders. Int. J. Dev. Disabil. 60, 174–183. doi:
10.1179/2047387714Y.0000000045

Lagattuta, K. H. (2005). When you shouldn’t do what you want to do: young
children’s understanding of desires. Rules Emot. Child Dev. 76, 713–733. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-8624.2005.00873.x

Lane, J. D., Wellman, H. M., Olson, S. L., LaBounty, J., and Kerr, D. C.
(2010). Theory of mind and emotion understanding predict moral
development in early childhood. Br. J. Dev. Psychol. 28(Pt 4), 871–889.
doi: 10.1348/026151009X483056

Liddle, B., and Nattle, D. (2006). Higher-order theory of mind and social
competence in school-age children. J. Cult. Evolu. Psychol. 4, 231–246. doi:
10.1556/JCEP.4.2006.3-4.3

Malti, T., Eisenberg, N., Kim, H., and Buchmann, M. (2013). Developmental
trajectories of sympathy, moral emotion attributions, and moral reasoning:
the role of parental support. Soc. Dev. 22, 773–793. doi: 10.1111/sode.
12031

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

12

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

Vera-Estay et al.

Social Cognition in Childhood

Malti, T., and Latzko, B. (2010). Children’s moral emotions and moral cognition:
towards an integrative perspective. New Dir. Child Adolesc. Dev. 2010, 1–10. doi:
10.1002/cd.272

Martel, M. M., Nigg, J. T., Wong, M. M., Fitzgerald, H. E., Jester, J. M., Puttler,
L. I., et al. (2007). Childhood and adolescent resiliency, regulation, and
executive functioning in relation to adolescent problems and competence in a
high-risk sample. Dev. Psychopathol. 19, 541–563. doi: 10.1017/S09545794070
70265

Mathersul, D., Palmer, D. M., Gur, R. C., Gur, R. E., Cooper, N., Gordon, E.,
et al. (2009). Explicit identiﬁcation and implicit recognition of facial emotions:
II. Core domains and relationships with general cognition. J. Clin. Exp.
Neuropsychol. 31, 278–291. doi: 10.1080/13803390802043619

Miller, M., and Hinshaw, S. P. (2010). Does childhood executive function predict
adolescent functional outcomes in girls with ADHD? J. Abnorm. Child Psychol.
38, 315–326. doi: 10.1007/s10802-009-9369-2

Miller, P. A., Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., and Shell, R. (1996). Relations of
moral reasoning and vicarious emotion to young children’s prosocial behavior
toward peers and adults. Dev. Psychol. 32, 210–219. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.32.
2.210

Moll, J., Zahn, R., de Oliveira-Souza, R., Krueger, F., and Grafman, J. (2005).
OPINION The neural basis of human moral cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6,
799–809. doi: 10.1038/nrn1768

Preacher, K. J., and Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and resampling strategies for
assessing and comparing indirect eﬀects in multiple mediator models. Behav.
Res. Methods 40, 879–891. doi: 10.3758/BRM.40.3.879

Preacher, K. J., and Kelley, K. (2011). Eﬀect size measures for mediation models:
quantitative strategies for communicating indirect eﬀects. Psychol. Methods 16,
93–115. doi: 10.1037/a0022658
and Chalik, L.

Rhodes, M.,

(2013). Social
interpersonal obligations. Psychol.

categories
Sci.
24,

as markers of
999–1006. doi:

intrinsic
10.1177/0956797612466267

Roberts, W., and Strayer, J. (1996). Empathy, emotional expressiveness, and

prosocial behavior. Child Dev. 67, 449–470. doi: 10.2307/1131826

Rosenqvist, J., Lahti-Nuuttila, P., Laasonen, M., and Korkman, M. (2014).
Preschoolers’
relationships with
other neurocognitive capacities. Child Neuropsychol. 20, 281–302. doi:
10.1080/09297049.2013.778235

recognition of emotional expressions:

Sharp, C., Fonagy, P., and Goodyer,

I. M. (2008). Social Cognition and

Developmental Psychopathology. Toronto, ON: Oxford University Press.

Smetana, J. G., Jambon, M., Conry-Murray, C., and Sturge-Apple, M. L.
(2012). Reciprocal associations between young children’s developing moral
judgments and theory of mind. Dev. Psychol. 48, 1144–1155. doi: 10.1037/a00
25891

Statistics Canada (2015). Median Total Income, by Family Type, by Province and
Territory. Available at: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/
cst01/famil108a-eng.htm [Accessed on 26 June, 2015].

Stevens, D., Charman, T., and Blair, R. J. R. (2001). Recognition of emotion in facial
expressions and vocal tones in children with psychopathic tendencies. J. Genet.
Psychol. 162, 201–211. doi: 10.1080/00221320109597961

Stroop, J. R. (1935/1992). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. J. Exp.

Psychol. 121, 15–23. doi: 10.1037/0096-3445.121.1.15

Tappan, M. B. (1997). Language, culture, and moral development: a vygotskian

perspective. Dev. Rev. 17, 78–100. doi: 10.1006/drev.1996.0422

Thomas, L. A., De Bellis, M. D., Graham, R., and LaBar, K. S. (2007). Development
of emotional facial recognition in late childhood and adolescence. Dev. Sci. 10,
547–558. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00614.x

Turiel, E. (1983). The Development of Social Knowledge : Morality and Convention.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Turiel, E. (2002). The Culture of Morality: Social Development, Context, and

Conﬂict. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Vera-Estay, E., Dooley,

(2014). Cognitive
underpinnings of moral reasoning in adolescence: the contribution of executive
functions. J. Moral Educ. 44, 17–33. doi: 10.1080/03057240.2014.986077

J., and Beauchamp, M. H.

J.

Wainryb, C., and Brehl, B. A. (2006). I thought she knew that would hurt my
feelings: developing psychological knowledge and moral thinking. Adv. Child
Dev. Behav. 34, 131–171.

Walker, L. J., Hennig, K. H., and Krettenauer, T. (2000). Parent and peer contexts
for children’s moral reasoning development. Child Dev. 71, 1033–1048. doi:
10.1111/1467-8624.00207

Walker, L.

J., and Taylor,

(1991). Family interactions and the
development of moral reasoning. Child Dev. 62, 264–283. doi: 10.1111/j.
1467-8624.1991.tb01530.x

J. H.

Wechsler, D. (1999). Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI). San

Antonio, TX: Harcourt Assessment.

Wechsler, D. (2005). Échelle d’intelligence de Wechsler Pour Enfants – Quatrième
Edition – Version Pour Francophones du Canada. Toronto, ON: Harcourt
Assessment.

Young, L., Cushman, F., Hauser, M., and Saxe, R. (2007). The neural basis of the
interaction between theory of mind and moral judgment. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 104, 8235–8240. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0701408104

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.

Copyright © 2016 Vera-Estay, Seni, Champagne and Beauchamp. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

13

March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 227

