Developmental  Psychology
1999, Vol.  35, No. 2,  386-391

Copyright  1999 by the American  Psychological  Association, Inc.
0012-1649/99/$3.00

Social  Interaction  Skills  and Theory  of  Mind  in  Young  Children

Anne C. Watson,  Charisse Linkie Nixon,  Amy  Wilson,  and Laura  Capage

West  Virginia  University

Two  studies  explored  relations  between  peer  social  skills  and  theory  of  mind  in  young  children.  In
Study  1, a global teacher rating of social skills with peers, performance  on a traditional false-belief  task,
a standardized assessment of auditory language comprehension, and a time sampling of amount of speech
with  peers  were  obtained.  Positive,  but  moderate,  zero-order  correlations  were  observed  between  the
false-belief  measure  and  social  skills, and  false  belief  accounted  for  a  significant  amount  of  additional
variance  in  social  skills  after  covarying  age  and  the  2  measures  of  language.  Study  2  replicated  the
findings  of  Study  1 by  using  a larger  sample  and  a standardized  teacher  questionnaire. The results  are
discussed with regard to the critical role of a mentalistic theory of behavior for human social interactions.

In  the  past  15  years,  there  has  been  an  explosion  of  research
concerning  children's  ability  to describe, predict,  and explain  the
relations  between  human  behavior  and  environmental  events  by
appeal  to  mental  phenomena  (e.g.,  perceptions,  desires,  beliefs,
and  intentions; Astington,  Harris, & Olson,  1988; Frye  & Moore,
1991; Wellman,  1990). Much of the empirical work in the area of
theory  of  mind  has  concentrated  on  the  ascertainment  of  age
differences  in performance  and the effects  of task modifications  on
performance  during  the  preschool  years  (e.g.,  Hala,  Chandler,  &
Fritz,  1991;  Mitchell  &  Lacohee,  1991;  Robinson  &  Mitchell,
1992). However,  attention  is now  turning to the question  of  indi-
vidual  differences  and  examination  of  potential  correlates  in  the
domain  of  social  interaction  (Astington  & Jenkins,  1995; Bartsch
&  Estes,  1996;  Dunn,  1994,  1995;  Feldman,  1992;  Lalonde  &
Chandler,  1995; Lewis & Mitchell, 1994). For example, features of
the  home  social  environment  (e.g.,  maternal  talk  about  causal
relations) and child  social behavior  (e.g., talk about feeling  states,
amount  of  cooperation  with  siblings), assessed  in the 2nd year of
life,  predict  performance  on  a  false-belief  task  in  the  3rd  year
(Brown, Donelan-McCall, & Dunn,  1996; Dunn, Brown, & Beard-
sail,  1991;  Dunn,  Brown,  Slomkowski,  Tesla,  &  Youngblade,
1991;  Youngblade  &  Dunn,  1996).  Similarly,  maternal  use  of
mental  terms  when  children  are  2  years  old  predicts  children's
mental-term usage at age 3 (Furrow, Moore, Davidge, & Chiasson,
1992), and preschoolers who engage in more verbal behavior about
internal  states  with  their  siblings  have  higher  levels  of  positive
affective  behavior  during  family  interactions  (Howe,  1991).

Positive  correlations  have  also  been  found  between  theory-of-
mind ability and number of siblings, suggesting that children  from

Anne  C.  Watson,  Charisse  Linkie  Nixon,  Amy  Wilson,  and  Laura

Capage,  Department  of  Psychology, West  Virginia  University.

Portions of this research were presented at the 25th Annual  Symposium

of  the Jean  Piaget  Society,  Berkeley,  California,  June  1995.

We  thank  the  children,  teachers,  and  parents  who  participated  in  the

study.  We  also  thank  Stanley  Cohen  for  his  advice on  data  analysis.

Correspondence  concerning this article should be addressed  to Anne C.
Watson,  Department  of  Psychology,  West  Virginia  University,  P.O.  Box
6040,  Morgantown,  West  Virginia  26506-6040.  Electronic  mail  may  be
sent  to  aoreilly@wvu.edu.

386

larger families  may have more opportunity  to engage in the types
of  social  interactions  that  contain  information  about  mental  con-
cepts  (Jenkins  &  Astington,  1993; Perner,  Ruffman,  &  Leekam,
1994).  In  particular,  contrasting  perspectives,  such  as  those  that
occur  in  cooperative  play,  negotiations  over  property,  and  culpa-
bility for wrongful  actions may be more plentiful  in larger families.
In other words, a home environment with more interactions simply
due  to  more  people  may  provide  more  opportunities  for  learning
thought-behavior  relations.

Additional  research  has  examined  false-belief  understanding
and  social  interactions  with  peers  in  the  school  setting.  Positive
correlations  have  been  found  between  specific  social  behaviors
observed  during  a  pretend  play  session  with  peers,  namely,  pro-
duction of joint proposals for pretense (e.g., "Let's make cookies")
and  the explicit  assignment  of  roles  (e.g.,  "You  be the  mommy";
Astington  &  Jenkins,  1995).  Subsequent  to  exploratory  analyses
concerning  performance  on  a  series  of  theory-of-mind  tasks  and
teacher ratings of multiple social behaviors, Lalonde and Chandler
(1995)  concluded  that  the  social  skills  that  were  not  related  to
theory  of  mind  were  ones  that  required  a  knowledge  of  only
routine social conventions  (e.g., saying "please" and "thank you")
and  suggested  that  the  traditional  false-belief  tasks  tapped  into
those  real-world  skills  requiring  some  understanding  of  mental
events  (e.g.,  following  simple  rules  in  games  without  being  re-
minded,  appropriately  ending  conversations).  This  possibility
needs further  examination  given the poor false-belief  task  perfor-
mance of children with autism (see Baron-Cohen,  Tager-Flusberg,
& Cohen,  1993, for  a review), because it suggests that a theory of
mind  could  have  profound  ramifications  for  successful  complex
social  behavior.

The  present  studies,  therefore,  sought  to  replicate  and  extend
research  in  this  area,  specifically,  the relation  of  false-belief  un-
derstanding  to  positive  interactions  with  peers.  In  Study  1,  we
assessed false-belief  understanding in children and asked  teachers
to rate children's ability to get along well with their peers. Previous
research  (e.g.,  Bierman  &  Montminy,  1993)  has  suggested  that
teacher report is a reliable indicator of these types of child behav-
ior  in  the  classroom.  In  addition,  of  critical  importance  to  corre-
lational work on false-belief  understanding  and social skills is the
assessment  of  control  variables.  First,  overall  verbal  ability  has

SOCIAL  SKILLS  AND THEORY  OF MIND

387

been  found  to  relate  significantly  to  performance  on  false-belief
tasks  (e.g.,  Brown  et  al.,  1996;  Watson,  Painter,  &  Bornstein,
1998). In  addition,  verbal  skills  are  tied  to performance  on  false-
belief  tasks of children  with autism (Happe,  1995). In all  previous
work,  however,  significant  correlations  between  social  behaviors
and false-belief  task performance,  although attenuated, were  found
when  age,  verbal  ability,  or  verbal  intelligence  was  partialed  out
(Astington  &  Jenkins,  1995;  Taylor,  Gerow,  &  Carlson,  1993;
Youngblade  &  Dunn,  1996).  Therefore,  we  used  a  measure  of
language  comprehension  ability  as  one  control  variable.  We  also
looked  at  talkativeness  to  assess  its  relation  to  teacher  ratings  of
social skills and theory  of mind. Dunn, Brown, Slomkowski, et al.
(1991)  found  no  relations  between  overall  number  of  conversa-
tional  turns  between  children,  siblings,  and  mothers  in  a  1-hr
sample  of  talk  and  performance  on  a  false-belief  task.  However,
we  posited  that  an  observational  measure  of  frequency  of  speech
acts during  a free-play  period  on the playground,  as  a measure  of
interest  in interacting  with others, might be related to both  teacher
ratings of  social  skills and theory-of-mind  understanding  in young
children. Therefore,  talkativeness  was used as a covariate  in these
analyses.

Study  1

Method

Participants

The  participants  were  26  three-  to  six-year-old  children  (range  =  3
years 9 months to 6 years 8 months, mean age = 5 years 3 months, SD =  9
months,  14 boys  and  12  girls)  attending  local  preschools  and  private
kindergartens  in Morgantown,  West  Virginia.  None  of the children had
completed  kindergarten.  Although  4  years  is  usually  used  to  mark  the
transitional  age for successful  false-belief  task  performance,  most  of the
previous work in theory of mind has looked at average performance  across
children,  not individual  variability  (e.g.,  Hala  et al.,  1991; Robinson  &
Mitchell,  1992). The range  of ages  at which  all children  can pass  false-
belief  tasks  is not known.  Children  were  predominantly  Caucasian and
from  middle-class  families.

Measures

Talkativeness.  Each  child  was observed  on one occasion  during  an
outside free-play  period  with peers. A time-sampling  procedure  was used,
with  observations  being  recorded  every  other  5  s for 5 min. Observers
recorded in an interval if the child made a vocalization directed  specifically
toward a peer. Two raters coded the same 6 children to assess interobserver
reliability.  Reliabilities  averaged  .94  (range  = 
.93-1.00)  by  Cohen's
(1968)  kappa.

Language  assessment.  The three  scales  of the Test  for the Auditory
Comprehension  of  Language—Revised  (TACL-R;  Carrow-Woolfolk,
1985)  were  administered  to  each  child:  (a)  Words—assessment  of the
"literal  and most common meanings of word classes such as nouns, verbs,
adjectives,  and adverbs, and of basic  word  relations  expressing  nonexist-
ence, agent—action, agent—agent, action-object,  attribution-object,  action—
attribution-object,  and  attribution-agent-action";  (b)  Morphology—as-
sessment of the "meaning of grammatical morphemes such as prepositions,
noun  number  and case,  verb  number  and tense,  noun-verb  agreement,
derivational  suffixes,  and the  meaning  of  pronouns,  tested  within  the
context  of  a  simple  sentence";  and  (c)  Sentences—assessment  of the
"meaning of elaborated sentence constructions, including the modalities of
single and combined  constructions  (interrogative  sentences, negative sen-
tences,  active  and passive  voice,  direct  and indirect  object),  embedded

sentences,  and partially  and completely  conjoined  sentences"  (Carrow-
Woolfolk,  1985, p.  1). For each  item,  the experimenter  read  a  word,  a
group of words, or a sentence to the child, who was then instructed to point
to  one of  three  pictures  that  best  corresponded  to  the  experimenter's
utterance. Raw scores for each of these scales were calculated according to
procedures  outlined  in the TACL-R  manual. (Age in months was entered
as a covariate  in the analyses so a standardized  score was not calculated;
see the Results  section.)

False belief.  Children  were led through a series of questions about the
contents of a box that did not contain what it appeared to contain  (adapted
from  Astington  & Gopnik,  1988;  Bartsch  & Wellman,  1989;  Gopnik &
Astington,  1988; Gopnik  &  Slaughter,  1991;  Lewis  &  Osborne, 1990;
Perner  & Wimmer,  1987). There  were two components to the false-belief
task.  The  first  required  the  children  to  remember  back  to  a  previous
knowledge  state  that  differed  from  their  current  knowledge  state  (they
thought that a box contained  Band-Aids and then learned that it contained
a  small  plastic  dog). This  question  has been  referred  to as the "represen-
tational change" false-belief  question. The second asked children to explain
the actions of a doll in terms of a belief that was false. Children were shown
that  a second  plain  box actually  contained  Band-Aids.  A doll  was intro-
duced,  and the children  were told that the doll had cut herself  and  needed
a Band-Aid. The doll was placed in front  of the Band-Aid  box (which the
children knew did not contain Band-Aids), rather than in front  of the plain
box  that  held the Band-Aids.  Then  the children  were  asked  why the doll
was  looking  in the Band-Aid  box for  Band-Aids  (Bartsch  &  Wellman,
1989).

Both  components  had a second  prompt  question  if the children did not
correctly answer the original question. In the representational-change  task,
children  were  first  asked,  "What  did you think  was in this  box?" If they
failed to answer that they thought it contained Band-Aids, they were asked,
"What  did  you  think  was  in  this  box  before  we  opened  it?" In the
explanation  task,  children  were  first  asked,  "Why  is Pam looking  in the
Band-Aid  box?"  If  they  failed  to  answer  that  she thought  it  contained
Band-Aids, they were asked, "What does she think?" The prompt questions
were  intended  to capture  additional  variability  in performance  under the
assumption  that  some  children  would  not be  able  to  answer  correctly
without the prompts whereas others would. More children correctly answer
the  questions  with  the prompts,  suggesting  that  they  are easier  than the
standard  questions  (Lewis & Osborne,  1990).

A correct response to each original question was scored as a 2, a correct
response  to each  prompt  was scored  as a  1, and an incorrect  response to
each  question  was scored  as a 0. Responses  to the two questions  were
summed for a score that ranged  from  0 to 4. Past research has  shown  that
performance  across  various theory-of-mind  tasks is correlated,  suggesting
that  aggregating  scores  across  tasks  is appropriate  (Slaughter  & Gopnik,
1996; Taylor  & Carlson,  1997).

Teacher  ratings of social  skills.  Teachers  at the children's  preschool
were asked to rate each of the children in terms of social skills with peers.
Teachers  responded  on a Likert  scale  from  1 to 5 to a  global  question
concerning  the extent  to  which  the children  engaged  in  positive  social
interactions with peers, with  1  being less socially skilled and 5 being highly
socially skilled.

Results

Table 1  shows the means, standard deviations, and ranges for all of
the  measures.  Children's  scores  were  in  the  normal  range  on  the
standardized  assessment  of  language.  All  data  were  examined  for
univariate  and bivariate  outliers. Data  were not complete  for  2 chil-
dren (1 child was missing the false-belief  task score, and  1 child was
missing the count of vocalizations to peers); these missing data points
were replaced  with the mean across participants.

Table  2  shows  the  correlations  between  the  covariates  and  the
other variables. Age was not significantly  related to false belief  or

388

WATSON,  NIXON,  WILSON,  AND  CAPAGE

Table  1
Means,  Standard  Deviations,  and Ranges  of  Measures:
Study  1 (N  =  26)

Measure

Age  (in  months)
TACL-R
Vocalizations  to  peers
False-belief  task  score
Teacher  social  skills  rating

M

63
80
12
2.24
3.6

SD

9
16
7
1.36
1.0

Range

45-80
41-104
2-25
0-4
1-5

Note.  TACL-R  =  Test for  the Auditory Comprehension  of  Language—
Revised.

social skills. The language comprehension measure was positively,
but  not  significantly,  correlated  with  both  variables.  Count  of
vocalizations  to peers  was  significantly  and  positively  correlated
with  teacher  ratings  of  social  skills  but  was  not  significantly
correlated  with  false-belief  scores.  In  addition,  at  the  zero-order
correlation level, the false-belief  task score was positively, but not
significantly,  correlated  with  the social  skills rating  (r  =  .35).

Although we did not obtain the expected pattern of relations of the
covariates  to false  belief  and  social  skills, we conducted  an explor-
atory  regression  analysis considering  the hypothesized  interrelations
of  these  variables.  Age,  language  comprehension,  and  amount  of
vocalizations  to  peers  were  entered  first  in  a  block  in  a  multiple
regression  analysis with teacher ratings of social skills as the depen-
dent variable. These variables  accounted  for  37% of the variance in
the teacher ratings, F(3, 22) =  4.35, p  <  .05. The beta weights for the
TACL-R score and for the number of vocalizations to peers (.42 and
.44, respectively) were significant at the/? <  .05 level. The false-belief
score  was  then  entered  on  the  second  step, producing  a  significant
multiple correlation squared OR2) incremental change of 10%, F(\, 21)
=  4.34, p  <  .05. The final regression equation accounted for 48% of
the variance in teacher reports of social skills, F(4, 21)  =  4.84, p  <
.01.  Only  the beta  weights for  the number  of  vocalizations  to peers
(.51, p  <  .01) and the false-belief  score (.36,/? <  .05) were significant
in the final  equation.

Discussion

This  study  found  that  false-belief  understanding  was  a  signifi-
cant  predictor  of  teacher  ratings  of  preschoolers'  and  kindergart-
ners'  positive  social  skills after  the effects  of  age, language  com-
prehension ability, and a measure of talkativeness with peers were
considered. These findings  link the study of this important  aspect
of  cognitive  development  to  the  social  context  in  which  it  devel-
ops:  The  use  of  teacher  ratings  of  positive  social  interactions
continues  the  work  on  how  a  theory  of  mind  might  be related  to
actual  behavior.  Furthermore,  because  social  interaction  deficits
are  a  central  feature  of  the  syndrome  of  autism,  the  finding  of  a
relation  between  false-belief  understanding  and  positive  social
skills  in  normal  children  supports  the  characterization  of  autism,
with its associated  feature  of poor social skills, as involving  some
kind  of  deficit  in  theory-of-mind  ability.

Study  2 was  undertaken  to  address  two issues. First,  a  signifi-
cant hypothesized  relation between false-belief  understanding  and
social skills ratings was found  in Study  1, even though the sample
size  was  small.  Of  concern,  however,  was  (a)  the  lack  of  a

significant  correlation  between  age  and  false-belief  task  perfor-
mance  and  (b)  the  positive  but  nonsignificant  relation  between
language  and false-belief  understanding.  Both of  these results  are
inconsistent with past research and may have been due to the small
sample  size.  Age  and  language  were  critical  covariates  in  these
analyses, and it was therefore  important to attempt to replicate the
findings  with  a larger  sample.

Second,  although  the  global  rating  of  children's  social  skills
showed  a  good  distribution  and  was  easily  understood  and  com-
pleted  by  teachers, the use of  a standardized  instrument  for  eval-
uating children's peer relations would serve to bolster this finding.
We  used  Harter's  (1979)  Perceived  Competence  Scale  for  Chil-
dren as a measure of social interactions with peers. This instrument
asks  teachers  to  rate children  on  10 items  related  to  social  inter-
actions  and  yields  two  scores:  a  measure  of  social  skills  and  a
measure of popularity with peers. Previous research has suggested
a  conceptual  distinction  between  the  two  measures, even  though
they are significantly  correlated  (Eisenberg et al.,  1993). (In addi-
tion, there  is  a  drop in  the reliability  of  the  scales  when  they  are
combined.)  The  Popularity  scale  correlates  significantly  with  a
more traditional sociometric procedure in which children are asked
to nominate their most  and least liked peers, and thus  presumably
assesses  the  treatment  the  children  receive  from  classmates.  The
Social Skills scale may be more related to teachers' assessments of
how  well  children  regulate  varying  levels  of  emotionality  and
manage  conflict.  Both  measures  of  social  competence  were  con-
sidered  to be potentially  related  to theory-of-mind  development.

In  Study  2, a  second  measure  of  theory  of  mind  was  obtained.
This measure has also been used extensively  to assess  false-belief
reasoning, thus enhancing  the applicability  of results of this study
to  previous  research.  To  keep  the  length  of  the  testing  sessions
across the first and second studies approximately comparable, only
the prompt questions from  the task used in Study  1 were included
in Study 2. Finally, data on language comprehension and child age
were  again  collected  to  be  used  as  covariates  in  the  analyses.
Playground  observations  of  vocalizations  to  peers  were  not  con-
ducted  in  Study  2  because  they  appeared  to  contribute  unique
variance  to  the  prediction  of  social  skills  (i.e.,  they  showed  no
relation  to false-belief  task  performance).

Study  2

Method

Participants

The participants were 52 children between the ages of 3 years 4 months
and 6 years  11 months (mean  age  =  5 years  1 month, SD  = 9 months, 30

Table  2
Correlations of  Covariates  With False-Belief  Score and  Teacher
Social Skills Rating:  Study  1 (N  =  26)

Covariate

False  belief

Age
TACL-R
Vocalizations  to peers

.09
.32
-.14

Social

skills  rating

-.04

.37t
.48*

Note.  TACL-R  =  Test for  the Auditory  Comprehension  of  Language—
Revised.
tp  <  .10.  *p  <  .05.

SOCIAL  SKILLS  AND THEORY  OF MIND

Table  3
Means,  Standard Deviations,  and Ranges  of  Measures:
Study  2(N  =  52)

Measure

Age  (in  months)
TACL-R
False-belief  task  score
Teacher  rating  of  popularity
Teacher  rating  of  social  skills

M

60.7
76.8
2.94
9.93
22.92

SD

9.2
18.6
1.06
2.30
4.38

389

Range

40-83
32-110
0-4
5-12
12-28

boys  and  22 girls). Children  came from  predominantly  White,  middle- to
upper-class  families  living  in  or around  Morgantown,  West  Virginia.

Measures

Language  assessment.  The three  scales  of  the  TACL-R  were  admin-
istered  to each  child  and  scored  according  to the procedures  described  in
Study  1.

False-belief  tasks.  The  first  false-belief  task  used  the  same  format  as
that in Study  1, except that a box of chocolate candy that actually contained
multicolored  buttons  was  used  and  only  the  question  that  included  the
phrase  "before  we  opened  it"  was  asked.  Children  were  shown  the  box,
asked what was inside it, shown what the box held, and then asked to state
what they thought was in the box before  it was opened. Next, a small doll
was  introduced.  Children  were  then  asked  what  the doll  would  think  was
inside the box after  they were reminded that the doll was not present when
the box was opened before. Children received  1  point for  a correct answer
to each  test  question.

In a second false-belief  task, the children were shown two puppets, Max
and  his  mom,  and  were  told  that  the  puppets  had  just  returned  from  a
shopping  trip  where  they  bought  some  chocolate  (Wimmer  &  Perner,
1983).  "Pretend"  chocolate  was  used  to  reduce  the  salient  effects  of  real
chocolate  (Chandler, Lalonde, Hala, & Fritz,  1991). The children  watched
as the mom puppet placed the chocolate in a small cupboard (Cupboard A).
The  Max  puppet  then  left  the  room.  During  his  absence,  Max's  mother
moved  the  chocolate  from  Cupboard  A  to  a different  location  (Cupboard
B). Max then returned to the room. Three premise understanding  questions
were then asked to ensure that the children understood the relevant aspects
of the story: (a) "Where did the pretend chocolate used to be?" (b) "Where
is the pretend chocolate  now?" and  (c) "Did  Max  see the chocolate  being
moved?" After  correctly answering these questions (parts of the story were
repeated  if  the  children  gave  any  incorrect  answers),  the  children  were
asked two test questions: (a) "Where will Max think the chocolate is when
he comes  back?" and  (b)  "Where  will  Max  first  look  for  the  chocolate?"
Children received  1  point for  a correct answer to each test question. These
scores were added to the unexpected-contents task score, and thus the total
false-belief  score ranged  from  0 to 4.

Teacher  ratings  of prosocial  behavior.  Teachers  were  asked  to  com-
plete  the  10-item  adaptation  of  Harter's  (1979)  Perceived  Competence
Scale  for  Children  for  each  participant  in  the  study.  Teachers  rated  each
item  using  a 4-point  response  scale. Each  item  contained  a contrast  con-
cerning social behavior (e.g., "Compared to other children this child's age,
this child has very good social skills" vs. "Compared  to other children  this
child's  age,  this  child  does  not  have  very  good  social  skills").  After
choosing  between  these  contrasts,  the  teachers  were  asked  to  indicate
whether  these  statements  were  "sort  of  or  "really"  true.  High  scores
indicate  more competence.  Seven  of the items assessed  children's  general
social  skills  (e.g.,  "This  child  usually  acts  appropriately"  vs. "This  child
usually  acts  inappropriately"),  and  3  of  the  items  assessed  children's
popularity  (e.g.,  "This  child  has  a  lot  of  friends"  vs. "This  child  doesn't
have a lot of friends").  Two separate  scores were derived  from  these item
sets.

Results

Table 3 shows the means, standard deviations, and ranges for all
of the measures. Again, children's scores were in the normal range
on  the  standardized  assessment  of  language  comprehension.  All
data  were  examined  for  univariate  and  bivariate  outliers,  and  no
influential  points  were  found.  TACL-R  scores  for  4  participants
were  not  complete,  and  these  participants  were  dropped  from  all
analyses.

Table  4  shows  the correlations  between  the  covariates  and  the
other  variables.  Both  age  and  language  comprehension  were  sig-

Note.  TACL-R  =  Test for  the Auditory  Comprehension  of  Language-
Revised.

nificantly  and positively correlated  with false belief and the Social
Skills scale score. Only language comprehension was  significantly
and positively  correlated  with  the Popularity  scale  score.

The  correlation  between  Social  Skills  and  Popularity  scale
scores  was  .81  (p  <  .01), indicating  substantial  overlap  between
these two measures. However,  although  at the zero-order  correla-
tion  level,  false-belief  task  performance  was  significantly  related
to  both  the  Social  Skills  scale  score  (r  =  .60, p  <  .01)  and  the
Popularity scale score (r  =  .41, p  <  .01), the difference  in the size
of  these  two correlations  was  also  significant,  f(49)  =  2.75, p  <
.01. This finding, in conjunction  with the fact that social skills and
popularity  have  been  conceptualized  as  somewhat  different  con-
structs in previous research  (Eisenberg et al.,  1993), indicates that
conducting  separate multiple regression analyses for the two mea-
sures  was  appropriate.

To  control  for  the effects  of  age and language  comprehension,
we first entered these covariates in a block in a multiple regression
analysis  with  social  skills  as  the  dependent  variable.  These  vari-
ables accounted for 24% of the variance in the teacher ratings, F(2,
49)  =  7.65, p  <  .01.  Only the beta weight for the TACL-R  score
was  significant  (.48,  p  <  .01).  The  false-belief  score  was  then
entered on the second step, producing an R2  incremental change of
14%, which was significant,  F(\,  48)  =  11.11, p  <  .01. The final
regression  equation  accounted  for  38% of  the variance  in  teacher
reports  of  social  skills,  F(3, 48)  =  9.85, p  <  .01. Only  the  beta
weight  for  the false-belief  score  (.57, p  <  .01) was  significant  in
this  final  equation.

The second multiple regression analysis to control for the  effects
of age and language comprehension  on the relation between  false-
belief  understanding  and  teacher  ratings  of  popularity  was  then
conducted. When the two covariates were entered as a block on the
first  step,  16% of  the  variance  in  the  Popularity  scale  score  was
accounted  for,  F(2, 49)  =  4.58, p  <  .05. Only the beta weight  for
the TACL-R  score was significant  (.42, p  <  .05). The  false-belief
score  was  entered  on  the  second  step, producing  an  insignificant
incremental change in R2  of 4%. This equation accounted for 20%
of the variance in Popularity scale scores, and although the final F
value was significant,  F(3, 48)  =  3.94, p  <  .05, none of the final
beta weights  were  significant.

Discussion

The data from  Study  2 support  those  of Study  1, using  slightly
different  false-belief  measures,  standardized  teacher  ratings  of
social  competence,  and  a  larger  sample  size.  Age  and  language

390

WATSON, NIXON, WILSON,  AND  CAPAGE

Table 4
Correlations  of  Covariates  With False-Belief  Score  and  Teacher
Ratings  of Social Skills  and Popularity:  Study  2 (N  =  52)

Covariate

False  belief

Social  skills

Popularity

Age
TACL-R

.61**
.72**

.30*
.49**

.21
.39**

Note.  TACL-R  = Test for  the Auditory Comprehension  of  Language
Revised.
*p<.05.  **p<.0\.

were  significantly  correlated  with  false-belief  reasoning,  as has
been found in previous research (Brown et al., 1996; Watson et al.,
1998). This result provides critical support to the replication of the
relation  between  false  beliefs  and  social  skills  found  in  Study 1,
after we controlled for shared variance due to these variables in the
regression analyses. Of note, after  we controlled  for the effects  of
age and language ability, false-belief  understanding predicted sig-
nificant  amounts  of  additional  variance  in  the  social  skills  score
but not the popularity score. Eisenberg et al. (1993) found that both
emotionality  (e.g.,  emotional  intensity  and  levels  of  negative af-
fect)  and  regulation  skills  (e.g.,  attentional  control  and  coping
mechanisms)  were related  to evaluations  of  popularity  and  social
skills  (all  ratings  were  done  by teachers).  However,  regulation
behaviors  were a more  important  component  of the  social  skills
assessment,  suggesting  links  between  metacognitive  skills  and
social  behavior  that  are  independent  of  peer  regard.  The  present
results are consistent  with this finding, as false-belief  understand-
ing might be expected to impact regulatory processes more directly
than emotional  arousal. This interpretation  is preliminary but sug-
gests  important  directions  for  future  research  on  associations  and
dissociations  of  temperament,  regulation,  metacognition,  and  so-
cial  functioning  in  preschoolers.

General  Discussion

The study of individual differences  is predicated on the assump-
tion  that  practice  in certain  skills  should  have  consequences  for
performance  on other tasks. The findings of these  studies  support
the idea that the development of theory-of-mind understanding that
is  tapped  by  the  false-belief  measures  is significantly  related to
important  aspects of social behavior (Astington  & Jenkins, 1995).
What  remains  unclear,  however,  are  questions  concerning  causal
mechanisms and direction of effects.  It is critical to remember that
the  majority  of studies  conducted  on individual  differences in
theory-of-mind  development  thus  far  have  been  correlational,  in-
cluding  the  present  ones,  and  there  can  be  no  inferences  drawn
about causality. Even for those studies that have made assessments
longitudinally  instead  of concurrently,  possible  third  underlying
variables  may  be  responsible  for  development  in both  domains
(Youngblade & Dunn,  1996). Bidirectionality  of effects  and recip-
rocal 
social-
conceptual understanding and social skills. Abundant and success-
ful  social  interactions  most  likely  provide  the  opportunity for
increased  learning  about  thought-behavior  relations,  and a more
well-developed  theory  of  mind  seems  likely  to  promote  adaptive
social  functioning.

interactions  are  particularly 

likely  between 

Clearly, intervention  and training studies are a critical next step

with regard to furthering  understanding  of the causal  implications
of  the  relations  observed  in this,  and  previous,  research.  For
example, Dockett and Smith (1995) gave one group of participants
a  play  training  intervention  in a preschool  setting  that  entailed
participation  in  complex  shared  pretense  about a visit  to a pizza
restaurant. Compared  with a control group, the intervention  group
showed  advanced  performance  on  false-belief  understanding  and
the use of  mental  state references  in  spontaneous  speech  at  post-
test. Additional research is necessary to replicate and extend these
findings  to examine  potential  consequences  in  the  social  domain
that  result  from  such  intervention.  Such  studies  not  only  will
contribute  to  understanding  the  causal  mechanisms  involved  but
also  would  have  direct  implications  for  social  skills  training in
preschoolers  at  risk  for,  or already  exhibiting,  peer  interaction
difficulties  (Capage  & Watson,  1998).  The  ability  to  fluently
appreciate  and  accurately  evaluate  multiple  perspectives  on  a
given  situation,  and  posit  causal  relations  between  past,  present,
and future  environmental  events  and behavior  through  the use of
mental  phenomena  as  intervening  variables,  may  enhance  chil-
dren's  ability  to  guide  behavioral  reactions  to external  stimuli  in
such  a  way  as to enable  less  conflictual  and  more  satisfying
relations  with others.

The traditional false-belief  task taps children's ability to explic-
itly  discuss,  that  is,  verbalize  to self  and  to  others,  the  relation
between environmental events and behavior using mentalistk  lan-
guage, and it is this metacognitive  ability  that is predicting  social
skills. Possible  links  to more  sophisticated  mentalistic  interpreta-
tions of behavior should also be considered  in future  research. For
example,  Pillow  and  Lovett  (1995)  described  the  increasing  use
across the preschool  and school  years of cognitive process  expla-
nations  (e.g.,  forgetting,  selective  attention,  lack  of perceptual
access) and mental  state terms for  the mistaken  action of  another
(see  also  Pillow  & Henrichon,  1996).  In looking  at individual
differences,  it is  even  possible  to  project  out  to  adolescence  and
adulthood  and  ask  whether  early  differences  have  consequences
for later complex  social-cognitive  behaviors  such as  appreciating
legal  definitions  of  personal  responsibility  (Goodnow  &  Warton,
1992). Continued empirical investigation  of individual  differences
and of the  mechanisms  through  which  individual  differences in
child behavior  with  others influence  development  is an  important
next  step in researchers'  continuing  exploration  of children's  the-
ory  of  mind.

References

Astington, J. W.,  &  Gopnik,  A.  (1988).  Knowing  you've  changed  your

mind:  Children's  understanding  of representational  change.  In J.  W.
Astington,  P.  L.  Harris,  &  D.  R.  Olson  (Eds.), Developing  theories of
mind (pp.  193-206). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Astington, J. W., Harris, P. L., & Olson, D. R. (Eds.). (1988). Developing

theories of mind. Cambridge, England: Cambridge  University  Press.

Astington,  J.  W.,  &  Jenkins, J.  M.  (1995). Theory  of  mind  development

and  social  understanding.  Cognition and Emotion,  9,  151-165.

Baron-Cohen,  S., Tager-Flusberg,  H.,  & Cohen,  D. J. (Eds.).  (1993).
Understanding other minds: Perspectives from  autism. Oxford, England:
Oxford  University  Press.

Bartsch,  K.,  &  Estes,  D.  (1996).  Individual  differences  in  children's  de-
veloping  theory  of  mind  and  implications  for  metacognition.  Learning
and Individual  Differences,  8,  281-304.

Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. (1989). Young children's attribution of action

to beliefs  and  desires.  Child Development,  60,  946-964.

SOCIAL  SKILLS  AND THEORY  OF MIND

391

Bierman,  K.  L.,  &  Montminy,  H.  P.  (1993).  Developmental  issues  in
social-skills  assessment  and intervention  with children  and  adolescents.
Behavior  Modification,  17, 229-253.

Brown,  J.  R.,  Donelan-McCall,  N.,  &  Dunn,  J.  (1996).  Why  talk  about
mental states? The significance  of children's conversations with  friends,
siblings, and  mothers.  Child Development,  67,  836-849.

Capage,  L.,  &  Watson,  A.  C.  (1998).  Social  cognition  and  aggressive

behaviors  in preschoolers.  Manuscript  submitted  for  publication.

Carrow-Woolfolk,  A. (1985). The Test for  the Auditory  Comprehension of

Language—Revised. Chicago: Riverside.

Chandler,  M.  J.,  Lalonde,  C.  E.,  Hala,  S.,  &  Fritz,  A.  (1991,  July).
Children's  theories of mental  life and social practices.  Paper  presented
at  the  biennial  meetings  of  the  International  Society  for  Studies  in
Behavioural  Development,  Minneapolis,  MN.

Cohen,  J.  (1968).  Weighted  kappa:  Nominal  scale  agreement  with  provi-
sion for scaled disagreement or partial credit. Psychological Bulletin, 70,
213-220.

Dockett,  S.,  &  Smith,  I.  (1995, March).  Children's  theories of  mind  and
their involvement  in complex  shared pretense.  Poster  session  presented
at  the  biennial  meeting  of  the  Society  for  Research  in  Child  Develop-
ment,  Indianapolis,  IN.

Dunn, J.  (1994). Changing  minds and changing relationships. In C. Lewis
&  P. Mitchell  (Eds.), Children's  early  understanding  of  mind: Origins
and development  (pp. 297-310).  Hillsdale,  NJ:  Erlbaum.

Dunn,  J.  (1995).  Connections  between  emotion  and  understanding  in

development.  Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum.

Dunn, J.,  Brown,  J.,  & Beardsall,  L.  (1991). Family  talk  about  emotions,
and  children's  later  understanding  of  others'  emotions.  Developmental
Psychology,  27,  448-455.

Dunn, J., Brown, J., Slomkowski, C,  Tesla, C,  & Youngblade, L. (1991).
Young  children's  understanding  of  other people's  feelings  and  beliefs:
Individual  differences  and  their  antecedents.  Child  Development,  62,
1352-1366.

Eisenberg,  N.,  Fabes,  R.  A.,  Bernzweig,  J.,  Karbon,  M.,  Poulin,  R.,  &
Hanish,  L.  (1993).  The  relations  of  emotionality  and  regulation  to
preschoolers'  social  skills  and  sociometric  status.  Child  Develop-
ment,  64,  1418-1438.

Feldman,  C. (1992). The new theory  of theory  of  mind. Human  Develop-

ment,  35,  107-117.

Frye, D., & Moore, C. (1991). Children's  theories  of mind: Mental  states

and social  understanding.  Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum.

Furrow,  D., Moore, C,  Davidge, J., & Chiasson, L. (1992). Mental  terms
in  mothers'  and  children's  speech:  Similarities  and relationships.  Jour-
nal of  Child Language,  19, 617-631.

Goodnow,  J.  J.,  &  Warton,  P.  M.  (1992).  Understanding  responsibility:
Adolescents'  views of delegation  and follow-through  within the  family.
Social Development,  1, 89-106.

Gopnik,  A.,  &  Astington,  J.  W.  (1988). Children's  understanding  of  rep-
resentational  change and  its relation to the understanding of false  belief
and  the  appearance-reality  distinction.  Child Development,  58,  26-37.
Gopnik,  A.,  &  Slaughter,  V.  (1991).  Young  children's  understanding  of

changes  in their mental  states.  Child Development,  62, 98—110.

Hala,  S.,  Chandler,  M.,  &  Fritz,  A.  (1991).  Fledgling  theories  of  mind:
Deception  as  a  marker  of  3-year-olds'  understanding  of  false  belief.
Child Development,  61,  83-97.

Happe,  F.  G.  (1995).  The  role  of  age  and  verbal  ability  in  the  theory  of
mind task performance  of subjects  with autism. Child Development,  66,
843-855.

Harter,  S.  (1979).  Perceived  Competence  Scale  for  Children:  Manual.

Denver,  CO: University  of  Denver.

Howe,  N.  (1991).  Sibling-directed  internal  state  language,  perspective-

taking, and  affective  behavior.  Child Development,  62,  1503-1512.

Jenkins, J. M., & Astington, J. W. (1993, March). Cognitive, linguistic, and
social factors  associated  with  theory  of  mind  development  in  young
children.  Paper  presented  at  the  biennial  meeting  of  the  Society  for
Research  in  Child  Development,  New  Orleans, LA.

Lalonde, C. E., & Chandler, M. J. (1995). False belief  understanding goes
to  school:  On  the  social—emotional  consequences  on  coming  early  or
late to a first  theory  of  mind.  Cognition  and Emotion,  9,  167-186.

Lewis, C,  & Mitchell, P. (Eds.). (1994). Children's  early understanding of

mind: Origins and development.  Hillsdale,  NJ:  Erlbaum.

Lewis,  C,  &  Osborne,  A.  (1990).  Three-year-olds'  problems  with  false
belief: Conceptual  deficit  or linguistic  artifact?  Child Development,  61,
1514-1519.

Mitchell, P., & Lacohee, H. (1991). Children's early understanding of  false

belief.  Cognition, 39,  107-128.

Perner,  J.,  Ruffman,  T.,  &  Leekam,  S.  R.  (1994).  Theory  of  mind  is
contagious: You catch it from  your sibs. Child Development, 65,  1228-
1238.

Perner,  J.,  &  Wimmer,  H.  (1987).  Three-year-olds'  difficulty  with  false
belief: The case for conceptual deficit. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology,  5,  125-137.

Pillow, B. H., & Henrichon, A. J. (1996). There's more to the picture than
meets  the eye:  Young  children's  difficulty  understanding  biased  inter-
pretation.  Child Development,  67,  803-819.

Pillow,  B.  H.,  &  Lovett,  S.  B.  (1995, March).  "He forgot":  Young chil-
dren's  use  of  cognitive  explanations  for  another  person's  mistakes.
Poster  session  presented  at  the  biennial  meeting  of  the  Society  for
Research  in Child  Development,  Indianapolis,  IN.

Robinson,  E. J.,  &  Mitchell,  P.  (1992). Children's  interpretation  of  mes-
sages  from  a speaker  with  a false  belief.  Child Development,  63,  639-
652.

Slaughter,  V.,  & Gopnik,  A.  (1996). Conceptual  coherence  in  the  child's
theory  of  mind: Training  children  to understand  belief.  Child Develop-
ment,  67, 2967-2988.

Taylor,  M.,  &  Carlson,  S.  M.  (1997).  The  relation  between  individual
differences  in  fantasy  and  theory  of  mind.  Child  Development,  68,
436-455.

Taylor,  M.,  Gerow,  L.  E.,  &  Carlson,  S. M.  (1993,  March).  The  relation
between  individual  differences  in fantasy  and  theory  of  mind.  Paper
presented  at the  biennial  meeting  of  the  Society  for  Research  in  Child
Development,  New  Orleans, LA.

Watson, A. C,  Painter, K. M., & Bornstein, M. H. (1998). Theory of mind
at  48  months:  Individual  differences  and  longitudinal  relations  to lan-
guage  ability.  Manuscript  in  preparation.

Wellman, H. M. (1990). The child's  theory of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT

Press.

Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and
the  constraining  function  of  wrong  beliefs  in  young  children's  under-
standing  of  deception.  Cognition,  13,  103-128.

Youngblade,  L.  M.,  &  Dunn,  J.  (1996).  Individual  differences  in  young
children's  pretend  play  with  mother  and  sibling:  Links  to  relationships
and  understanding  of  other  people's  feelings  and  beliefs.  Child Devel-
opment,  66,  1472-1492.

Received  March  13, 1997
Revision  received  April  29,  1998
Accepted  April  29,  1998

